2013 IEEE 32nd International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems

Automated Multi-Graceful Degradation: A Case Study
Yiyan Lin
Michigan State University
East Lansing, USA
linyiyan@cse.msu.edu

Sandeep Kulkarni
Michigan State University
East Lansing, USA
sandeep@cse.msu.edu

most stringent level, masking, requires that both these properties
are satisﬁed.
Although the three levels are sufﬁcient to describe several
important fault-tolerance requirements, they cannot be applied in
certain circumstances. To illustrate this, consider the case where
the given system satisﬁes two safety constraints Sf1 , (say, two
processes are never in the critical section simultaneously) and Sf2
(say, processes enter critical section in an alternating manner when
they are requesting for critical section constantly) and a liveness
constraint, say Lv1 (say, each requesting process must eventually
enter critical section). Furthermore, assume that in the presence of
some fault, it is necessary to satisfy Sf1 at all times even though
Sf2 may be temporarily violated before the system recovers from
the fault. However, after recovery is complete, the system must
satisfy the entire speciﬁcation consisting of Sf1 , Sf2 and Lv1 .
This requirement cannot be captured by masking fault-tolerance
since it would require both Sf1 and Sf2 to be satisﬁed in the
presence of faults. Hence, if we use the algorithm for adding
masking fault-tolerance in this context, it is likely to declare failure
since it will try to ensure that Sf2 is satisﬁed in the presence
of faults. It cannot be captured by failsafe fault-tolerance since it
may not guarantee recovery to legitimate states. Hence, if we use
the algorithm for adding failsafe fault-tolerance in this context, it
may produce a program that does not recover to legitimate states.
Likewise it cannot be captured by nonmasking fault-tolerance, since
it may not guarantee that Sf1 is satisﬁed during recovery. Hence,
if we use an algorithm for adding nonmasking fault-tolerance in
this context, it may produce a program that violates Sf1 during
recovery.
This requirement can be captured by the notion of graceful
degradation. Intuitively, in a graceful fault-tolerant program1 , the
program satisﬁes a subset of the requirements in the presence
of faults. The exact subset of requirements can vary depending
upon the nature of faults and the aspects of the original system.
Moreover, a graceful fault-tolerant program may not reach the
original legitimate states after recovery is complete. For example,
one variation of the above problem is that upon recovery, the
program only satisﬁes Sf1 and Lv1 . In this case, the program
cannot necessarily recover to original behavior since that would
force Sf2 to be also satisﬁed upon recovery. In other words, new
behavior that only satisﬁes a subset of the original speciﬁcation
needs to be added. Another instance where recovering to original
behavior is not possible includes the case where it is necessary to
provide liveness requirement for only a subset of processes and
preventing some other processes from accessing critical section.
When a system is subject to different types of faults, it is often
necessary to consider multi-graceful degradation, where the exact

Abstract—We focus on the problem of multi-graceful degradation. In
multi-graceful degradation, the system provides successively reduced
guarantees in the presence of increasingly severe faults. We present an
automated technique for generation of a multi-graceful-degraded program from its original fault-intolerant/ideal version. In this algorithm,
we begin with (1) an ideal program that satisﬁes all its speciﬁcation in
the absence of faults, (2) a set of faults that need to be tolerated and
(3) reduced requirements in their presence. We subsequently generate
several gracefullly degrading programs that only satisfy the reduced
requirements. This step also identiﬁes new states to which program
needs to recover to satisfy the reduced speciﬁcation. Subsequently, we
utilize the original input program and the generated programs that
ensures that (1) in the absence of faults, the entire speciﬁcation is
satisﬁed and (2) in the presence of faults, the program recovers to
states from where the corresponding reduced speciﬁcation is satisﬁed.
We illustrate our technique with a case study of a system in the fuelcell lab of the Ohio Coal Research Center (OCRC). In this system, it is
important to satisfy safety of lab personnel as well as safety of people
in the building in which it is located. Moreover, in case of device
failures, it is necessary to provide weaker guarantees that capture
the best possible protection. In our example, we begin with an ideal
model for this system and successively add multi-graceful degradation
to obtain the same program (with some abstractions) as the one that
was designed manually for this system.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Fault-tolerance is one of the essential requirements for computer
systems. Speciﬁcally, it is desirable that the system continues to
operate correctly even when it is perturbed by faults such as
message loss, Byzantine nodes, crashed nodes, failed components,
etc. Moreover, it is important to provide assurance about the faulttolerance property.
One way to provide such assurance is through formal methods
such as model checking, where one veriﬁes the given model
satisﬁes its speciﬁcation, model revision, where one revises a
model to satisfy a given property (e.g., a fault-tolerance property),
or model synthesis where one constructs a model for the given
(fault-intolerant and/or fault-tolerant) system that is correct by
construction.
In this paper, we focus on providing fault-tolerance via model
revision where we begin with a fault-intolerant model of the system
and subsequently revise it to add fault-tolerance. Model revision is
especially useful in cases where new faults that affect a system
are identiﬁed. It is also useful in providing separation of concerns
where the designer focuses on functionality aspect and can utilize
automated techniques for providing fault-tolerance.
In the context of automation with model revision, three levels
of fault-tolerance have been typically considered in the literature.
These three levels are based on decomposition the system speciﬁcation in terms of safety and liveness. Of these, the ﬁrst level, failsafe
, requires that safety be preserved in the presence of faults. The
second level, nonmasking, requires that the system should recover
to a legitimate state after the occurrence of faults. And, the third and
1060-9857/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/SRDS.2013.17

1 The word graceful degradation has several interpretations in the literature. Our interpretation is from [1] and is described later in this paper.

81

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. P ROGRAM , S PECIFICATION AND G RACEFUL D EGRADATION

subset of functionality that is provided depends upon the type
of fault that occurs in the system. Speciﬁcally, in multi-graceful
degradation, we consider faults that are increasing in severity. And,
with each increase in severity, the requirements that need to be
satisﬁed are reduced.

In this section, we give formal deﬁnitions of programs, program
speciﬁcations, and graceful degradation. The program is speciﬁed
in terms of its state space and transitions. The deﬁnition of speciﬁcation is adapted from [2]. The notion of graceful degradation is
adapted from [1].

Based on the above discussion, in this paper, we consider the
problem of automation in designing multi-graceful degradation.
Our approach orders the faults into different fault-classes based on
the increasing order of severity and decreasing order of guarantees
in their presence. Then, we design a multi-step process where each
fault class is considered independently. In each step of this process,
we, ﬁrst, automatically expand the given program (if needed) to
introduce new behaviors that are necessary for providing degraded
speciﬁcation. We also shrink the given program to ensure that the
requirements in the presence of faults are satisﬁed, i.e. we eliminate
behaviors that violate the new speciﬁcation. The resulting program
is then used in the next step to add graceful fault-tolerance to the
new fault class.

A. Program
A program p, speciﬁed as a tuple Sp , δp , consists of its
state space Sp and transitions δp , where δp ⊆ Sp × Sp . A state
predicate of p is any subset of Sp . A state predicate S is closed
in p (respectively, δp ) iff (∀(s0 , s1 ) ∈ δp : (s0 ∈ S ⇒ s1 ∈ S)).
A sequence of states, σ = s0 , s1 , · · ·, is a computation of p
iff(1) ∀j : 0 < j < length(σ) : (sj−1 , sj ) ∈ δp , and (2) if σ is
ﬁnite and terminates in state sl then there does not exist state s such
that (sl , s) ∈ δp . In other words, in each step of the computation
of p, some transition of p is executed. And, the computation is
ﬁnite iff p does not have any transition in the ﬁnal state.
The projection of program p on state predicate S, denoted as
p|S is the program Sp , {(s0 , s1 ) ∈ δp ∧ s0 , s1 ∈ S}. In other
words, p|S includes transitions of p that begin and end in S.
Notation. In the remaining part of this paper, if the context is
clear, we use p and δp (transitions of p) interchangeably. Also, we
say that a state predicate S is true in state s iff s ∈ S.

We illustrate our algorithm based on a real-world example
of Ohio Coal Research Center (OCRC) fuel lab safety system.
This system was developed in collaboration with Dr. Leal and is
deployed at Ohio University. This system is intended for use in the
fuel cell lab where there dangerous gases such as hydrogen and
carbon monoxide are generated. In some cases, these gases may
leak into the lab thereby creating a hazard. Moreover, for efﬁciency
purposes, it is desirable that the lab use central supply and exhaust
system thereby creating a possibility that the leaked gases may
escape into the other parts of the building. The goal of the system
is to ensure safety of the lab as well as the building in which the
lab is located. Moreover, equipment failure can make it necessary
to provide a graceful behavior where a subset of requirements is
provided.

B. Speciﬁcation
Following Alpern and Schneider [2], we let the speciﬁcation
of program consisting of a safety speciﬁcation and a liveness
speciﬁcation. The safety speciﬁcation is speciﬁed in terms of a
set of bad states, say specbs , that program is not allowed to reach,
and a set of bad transitions, specbt , that the program is not allowed
to execute. Thus, a sequence s0 , s1 , · · · (denoted by σ) satisﬁes
the safety speciﬁcation iff (1) ∀j : 0 ≤ j < length(σ) : sj ∈
specbs , and (2) ∀j : 0 < j < length(σ) : (sj−1 , sj ) ∈ specbt .
The liveness speciﬁcation, on the other hand, denotes “good
thing” happens during program execution. We use leadsto property
(L T ) to denote liveness speciﬁcation, where both L and T
are state predicates. Thus, a sequence s0 , s1 , · · · (denoted by
σ) satisﬁes the safety speciﬁcation iff ∀j : (L is true in sj
⇒ ∃k : j ≤ k < length(σ) :T is true in sk ).
A speciﬁcation, say spec is a tuple Sfp , Lvp , where Sfp is a
safety speciﬁcation and Lvp is a liveness speciﬁcation. A sequence
σ satisﬁes spec iff it satisﬁes Sfp and Lvp . Hence, for brevity,
we say that the program speciﬁcation is an intersection of a safety
speciﬁcation and a liveness speciﬁcation.
We say that program p satisﬁes spec from state predicate S iff
(1) S is closed in p and (2) Every computation of p that starts in
a state, say s, where s ∈ S satisﬁes spec.
Given a program p, a state predicate S, and speciﬁcation spec,
we say S is invariant of p iff (1) p satisﬁes spec from S and (2)
S = ∅.

In this paper, we begin with an ideal model for this system
where no gas leak has occurred. We subsequently consider faults
(and environment conditions that are treated as faults) that include
leakage of gas and failure of equipment. Then, we consider the
maximum guarantees that can be provided when different faults
occur. We utilize these weaker speciﬁcations in the derivation of
multi-graceful degradation model for the OCRC fuel lab system.
Contributions of the paper.
− We formalize the problem of multi-graceful degradation in
the context of model revision.
− We present a stepwise algorithm for adding multi-graceful
degradation.
− We illustrate how our algorithm can be applied to a distributed system.
− We illustrate our algorithm with the real-world case study
about the OCRC fuel lab system.
Organization of the paper. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: In Section II, we deﬁne programs, speciﬁcations and
graceful degradation. Section III describes the problem statement
for adding multi-graceful degradation and Section IV describes
the corresponding algorithm. Section V describes the fault-free
behaviors of the ventilation system at Ohio Coal Research Center.
Section VI shows how our algorithm is applied in this case
study to obtain the program that was designed manually for this
task. Finally, Section VII describes related work and Section VIII
describes the conclusion and future work.

C. Graceful Degradation
In graceful degradation, it is expected that the program will
satisfy a stronger speciﬁcation under normal circumstances; and, it
will satisfy a weaker speciﬁcation under some other circumstances
(e.g., in the presence of faults). Let spec = Sf, Lv and
specr = Sfr , Lvr  be two speciﬁcations. We say that specr is
weaker than spec iff for any sequence σ if σ satisﬁes specr then
σ satisﬁes spec. We denote the relation between spec and specr
as spec ⊆ specr

82
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

weaker speciﬁcations. It also takes in as inputs state predicates
Sa1 , Sa2 , · · · , San . These state predicates capture constraints, if
any, under which the corresponding graceful behavior is expected.
By default, they could be set to ¬I, i.e., all states outside the
invariant of the original program. Algorithm 1 considers the faults
successively. For fault class f1 , it generates a graceful program
satisfying a relaxed speciﬁcation specr1 (Line 3). This program
preserves all original behaviors of p and adds new behaviors that
satisfy specr1 . The details of this algorithm (repeated from [4])
are presented in Algorithm 2.
After obtaining the graceful program that satisﬁes specr1 , we
add fault tolerance to f1 (Line 4). This algorithm adds masking tolerance to the input program. Towards this end, we can utilize any of
the algorithms in [5], [6], [7]. We use the name Add masking to
describe such a generic algorithm. These algorithms differ in terms
of the speciﬁcations they handle and the ability of processes to read
and write variables. They also differ in terms of the complexity.
Speciﬁcally, the algorithm in [5] is for high atomicity programs.
Algorithm in [6] is for distributed programs. Algorithms in [5],
[6] deal with speciﬁcations discussed in Section II. Algorithm
in [7] deals with more general speciﬁcations. Algorithms in [5],
[6] are polynomial in the size of the state space. The soundness
results of algorithms in our paper are not affected by the choice
of implementation of Add masking. Regarding complexity, we
utilize the algorithms in [5], [6] (which are polynomial in |Sp |).
Since our reuse is black-box in nature, we only rely on the proof
(from [5], [6], [7]) that it adds masking fault-tolerance to the
input program without introducing new transitions in the absence
of faults. However, for the convenience of the reader, we brieﬂy
describe the key steps these algorithms. Given the fault-intolerant
program, a set of fault transitions, the invariant and speciﬁcation,
Add masking ﬁrst ensures all the reachable states by p in the
presence of f satisfy the safety speciﬁcation, and then excludes the
computation that starts outside the invariant and cannot possibly
reach a state in the invariant. In addition, Add masking also
resolves deadlock states and removes computations that reach the
deadlock states if it is impossible to add recovery.
If adding fault-tolerance causes removal of states inside the
original invariant I then those states must also be removed from
the ﬁnal invariant If . Moreover, removal of such states from If
should not create deadlocks inside If . Hence, the loop on Line
6-11 removes such offending states.
Finally, this whole process is repeated for each fault-class.

III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
In this section, we formally deﬁne the problem of adding
multi-graceful degradation. A multi-graceful degradation program
satisﬁes its original speciﬁcation when no faults have occurred.
However, if faults occur then depending upon their severity, it
satisﬁes a weaker speciﬁcation. Using the standard approach (e.g.,
[3]) for modeling faults, we model faults of program p as state
perturbations, i.e., faults of program p are a subset of Sp × Sp
where Sp is the state space of program p. To characterize the
severity of faults, a multi-graceful degradation program identiﬁes
a set of faults, say f1 , f2 , · · · , fn such that ∀j : 0 < j < n :
fj ⊆ fj+1 . Since fj ⊆ fj+1 , fj+1 can perturb the program
at least as much as fj does. Hence, we say that fj+1 is more
severe than fj . In the presence of increasingly severe faults, multigraceful degradation program provides successively weaker guarantees. Hence, it identiﬁes a set of speciﬁcations specr0 (= spec,
the original speciﬁcation), specr1 , specr2 , · · · , specrn such that
∀j : 0 ≤ j < n : specrj+1 is weaker than specrj Moreover, in
the presence of increasingly severe faults, the program may not
recover to its original behavior. Hence, it identiﬁes a set of state
predicates I1 , I2 , · · · In to which it recovers after the recovery is
complete.
For each class of faults, a multi-graceful degradation program
provides the desired level of tolerance. As discussed earlier in the
paper, the tolerance level can be masking, nonmasking or failsafe.
For brevity, we use masking fault-tolerance in this paper, where
we say that p is masking f -tolerant to spec (=Sf, Lv) from I
iff (1) p satisﬁes spec from I and (2) ∃T :: (a) I ⊆ T , (b) p ∪ f
satisﬁes Sf from T , and (c) Every computation of p that starts
from a state in T has a state in I. In other words, a masking faulttolerant program ensures that in the presence of faults, the safety
speciﬁcation is always preserved and that the program recovers
to states from where it satisﬁes both the safety and liveness
speciﬁcation. We note that all deﬁnitions and algorithms in this
paper could be extended to other levels of tolerances as well.
To add multi-graceful degradation to a given program p that
satisﬁes its speciﬁcation, say spec from invariant, say I, we need to
construct a program pf with invariant If such that pf satisﬁes spec
from If without using any new behaviors other than those used
by p. However, if faults occur then it needs to provide appropriate
level of tolerance to them as well as recover to states from where it
satisﬁes the corresponding weaker speciﬁcation. Thus, the problem
statement is as follows:

Theorem 1. Algorithm 1 is sound.

Problem Statement: III.1
Addition of Fault-Tolerant Graceful-Degradation
Given p, spec, I , such that p satisﬁes spec (= specr0 ) from I ,
set of faults, f1 , f2 , · · · , fn ,
where ∀j : 0 ≤ j < n : fj ⊆ fj+1
set of relaxed speciﬁcations specr1 , specr2 , · · · , specrn ,
where ∀j : 0 ≤ j < n : specrj+1 is weaker than specrj
Generate a multi-graceful fault-tolerant program pf
and the invariant If such that
∃I1 , I2 , · · · In where If ⊆ I1 ⊆ I2 ⊆ · · · ⊆ In
1: If ⊆ I , pf |If ⊆ p|If
2: pf satisﬁes spec from If
3: pf is masking fi -tolerant to specri from Ii .

Proof:
To show Algorithm 1 is sound we ﬁrst show that Algorithm 2
is sound. That is by given a program p, its invariant I, original
speciﬁcation spec and the weaker speciﬁcation specr , the graceful
program pg and its invariant Ig satisﬁes the following conditions
− pg |I = p|I, I ⊆ Ig .
All transitions of p that start in I are preserved in pg on
Line 1. And, none of them are removed on Line 7 or 11, as
p satisﬁes spec from I. Hence, this condition is satisﬁed.
− pg satisﬁes specr from Ig .
Closure of Ig follows from Line 7 where transitions that can
potentially violate the closure are removed.
Moreover, by construction, pg cannot reach a state in specrbs
and cannot execute a transition in specrbt . Finally, by Lines
11 and 12, the liveness property is also satisﬁed. Hence, pg
satisﬁes specr from Ig .

IV. A LGORITHM
In this section, we introduce the algorithm for adding multigraceful degradation in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 takes as input the set of increasingly severe faults and correspondingly

83
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Adding multi-graceful degradation
Input: fault-intolerant program p, fault-intolerant program invariant I.
state predicates Sa1 , Sa2 , · · · , San
weaker speciﬁcations specr1 , specr2 , · · · , specrn .
fault transitions f1 , f2 , · · · , fn .
Output: masking fault-tolerant program pf , and its invariant If
1: p := p, I  := I
2: for i = 1 to n do
3:
pgi , Igi := Gen graceful(Sai ,p ,I  ,specri ) // This function invokes Algorithm 2 .
4:
p , I  :=Add masking(pgi ,fi , Igi , specri ) // If any of above two procedures fails, then algorithm aborts and reports no result
returned.
5:
p := p |I  , I  := I  ∩ I 
6:
while deadlock(I  , p ) = ∅ do
7:
I  := I  − deadlock(I  , p )
8:
I  := I  ∩ I 
9:
p := maxp(p , I  , I  )
10:
p := p |I 
11:
end while
12:
p := p , I  := I 
13: end for
14: return p as pf and I  ∩ I as If
Function: maxp(t: transition predicate, S1 ,S2 ,· · · :set of state predicates where S1 ⊆ S2 ⊆ · · · )
return {(s0 , s1 )|t ∩ (s0 ∈ S1 ⇒ s1 ∈ S1 ) ∧ (s0 ∈ S2 ⇒ s1 ∈ S2 ) ∧ · · · }
Function: deadlock(S: state predicate , t: transition predicate)
/ t)}
return {s0 |s0 ∈ S ∧ (∀s1 ∈ S : (s0 , s1 ) ∈

Algorithm 2 Graceful program generation
Input: state predicate Sa , program transitions p, invariant I,
weaker speciﬁcation specr = Sfr , Lvr , including weaker safety speciﬁcation Sfr (consisting of Sfrbs and Sfrbt ) and weaker
liveness speciﬁcation Lvr (consisting n leads-to properties of the form Fi  Ti , i ∈ 1 · · · n).
Output: graceful program pg and invariant Ig .
1: IΔ := Sa − Sfrbs
2: I  := I ∪ IΔ
3: p := {(s0 , s1 )|s0 , s1 ∈ I  :: (s0 ∈ I ∧ (s0 , s1 ) ∈ p) ∨ (s0 ∈ IΔ ∧ (s0 , s1 ) ∈
/ Sfrbt )}
4: repeat
5:
repeat
6:
Iold := I 
7:
p := maxp(p , I, I  )
8:
I  := I  − deadlock(I  , p )
9:
until Iold = I 
10:
Iold := I  , 
pold := p
11:
p := p − i∈1···n {(s0 , s1 )|s0 ∈ I  ∧ rank(s0 , Ti , p ) ≤ rank(s1 , Ti , p ) ∧ rank(s0 , Ti , p ) = 0 ∧ rank(s1 , Ti , p ) = ∞}
12:
I  := I  − i∈1···n {s|rank(s, Ti , p ) = ∞ ∧ s ∈ Fi ∧ s ∈
/ I}
13: until Iold = I  ∧ pold = p
14: return p as pg , I  as Ig if I  = ∅, otherwise declare no graceful program generated.
Function: rank(s: state , T : state predicate , t: transition predicate)
return the shortest path length from s to one of the state in T , if the path(consisting only transitions in t) exists; or ∞, otherwise.

84
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

− pg satisﬁes spec from I.
Since p satisﬁes spec from I, none of the transitions that
begin in I are removed. Hence, pg |I = p|I. Hence, pg
satisﬁes spec from I.
Now we use the above three properties to prove soundness of
Algorithm 1. To prove soundness of Algorithm 1, we need to show
that pf and If satisfy conditions in Problem Statement III.1
− If ⊆ I, pf |If ⊆ p|If .
If ⊆ I follows from Line 14. pf |If ⊆ p|If follows from
Line 4 since it does not add any new transition to p|If .
− pf satisﬁes spec from If .
Note that after each iteration (Line 2 to Line 13) p satisﬁes
the speciﬁcation from invariant generated in previous steps.
It follows from Line 3 that I  is closed in pgi ; and from Line
4 that I  is closed in p since Add masking does not add
any new transition in Igi as well as in I  . In addition, from
Line 6 to Line 11, no new transition is added and deadlock
states are resolved. Hence If is closed in pf . Moreover pf
satisﬁes spec since If ⊆ I.
− pf is masking fi -tolerant to specri from Ii .
Th fact that p obtained after each iteration (Line 2 to
Line 13) satisﬁes specri follows the same proof above.
And the fact that pf is masking fi -tolerant is ensured via
Add masking.

should be restricted to utilize a version of Add masking
that adds fault-tolerance to a distributed program (e.g. [6]).
− Read Restrictions. Consider a transition (s0 , s1 ), (s0 = s1 )
excluded from program p. If process j cannot read a variable,
say v, then p must exclude corresponding transitions from
s0 where s0 and s0 differ only in the variable v. Let this
transition be (s0 , s1 ). Now, it must be the case that s0 and
s0 are identical except for the value of v. And the value
of v must remain unchanged in transition (s0 , s1 ). Thus, if
(s0 , s1 ) is a transition of process j whose set of readable
variables is rj , then the corresponding group of transitions
is identiﬁed as follows:
group(j, rj )(s0 , s1 ) =
{(s0 , s1 )|(∀x ∈ rj :: x(s0 ) = x(s0 ) ∧ x(s1 ) = x(s1 ))∧
(∀x ∈
/ rj :: x(s0 ) = x(s1 ) ∧ x(s0 ) = x(s1 ))}
Thus, when transitions are removed from a program (e.g.,
on Line 9 in Algorithm 1, Line 3, Line7 and Line 11 in
Algorithm 2), we need to remove the corresponding group
of transitions.
It is straightforward to observe that these changes do not affect
the soundness of the algorithm (Theorem 1). However, with this
change, the algorithm may be incomplete. This is unavoidable
since it is expected that adding multi-graceful degradation to a
distributed program is NP-complete. We also have technical report
for synthesizing graceful fault-tolerant program, including case
studies for printer system and Byzantine Agreement problem [8].

Theorem 2. Algorithm 1 is polynomial in the size of (|Sp | ∗ n)
where Sp is the size of state space and n is number of fault classes.

V. O HIO C OAL R ESEARCH C ENTER V ENTILATION S YSTEM
The OCRC safety system [9] was designed to protect personnel
and facilities by detecting the presence of explosive and/or toxic
gas and either dealing with it, or by alerting lab personnel and
emergency responders. The ﬁrst line of defense is ventilation: to
evacuate any gas before it becomes a hazard. Ordinarily, ventilation
is handled by the building’s central air supply (see Fig 1) and
exhaust, augmented by an exhaust booster fan. If gas is detected
(above a speciﬁed threshold), the lab needs to be isolated from
the rest of the building by closing the exhaust vent cover and
then turning off the booster, and turning on a local exhaust fan
that evacuates air directly outside the building. Depending on the
level of gas concentration, status lights in the lab will change from
red to yellow or red, and a claxon alarm will sound. In addition,
automated phone calls are placed to lab personnel and emails are
sent.
The system needs to tolerate equipment faults. For example,
if the central exhaust supply fails, a local supply fan is turned
on. Sensors are generally duplicated so that failure of one sensor
is tolerated, and relative accuracy can be compared. When a gas
hazard is detected, isolation will not be possible if the vent cover
does not close; or isolation might be possible but the local exhaust
fan does not turn on. In the presence of these faults, the system
needs to reach the safest available status. Possible status values are
Safe, NotLocal, UnsafeLab and UnsafeCentral.
Status Safe corresponds to the case where there is ventilation,
and the lab is isolated if necessary. Ventilation can be Central
(central exhaust on, vent cover open, booster on) or Local (vent
cover closed and local exhaust on); in both cases central and/or
local supply are on. NotLocal corresponds to the case where there
is ventilation but not isolation; this means central exhaust is being
used. UnsafeLab corresponds to the case where the lab is isolated
although ventilation is inadequate. UnsafeCentral corresponds to
the case where the lab should be isolated but is not, and ventilation

Proof: The number of iterations from Line 5 to Line 9 and
from Line 4 to Line 13 in Algorithm 2 is polynomial in (|Sp |).
Hence the complexity of Algorithm 2 is polynomial in the size of
(|Sp |). If we utilize the Add masking algorithm from [5] then
its complexity is also polynomial in the size of (|Sp |). Moreover,
in Algorithm 1, the outer loop (from Line 2 to Line 13) executes
at most n iterations and the inner loop (from Line 6 to Line 11)
executes polynomial times in (|Sp |). Therefore, the complexity of
Algorithm 1 is polynomial in the size of (|Sp | ∗ n).
A. Application of Algorithm 1 for Distributed Programs
Algorithm 1 can be applied to distributed programs as follows.
Intuitively, in a distributed program, a process can read and write
only a subset of program variables. Hence, to apply the algorithm in
a distributed system, we need to ensure that the program generated
is realizable under the constraints imposed by the distributed
system. To capture such notion, we introduce wj as a set of
variables process j can write and rj as a set of variables process
j can read. Furthermore transitions of a program are partitioned
into transitions of its processes. And, the transitions included in
a process need to satisfy the constraints imposed by their readwrite restriction. We identify these restrictions, and their effect on
Algorithm 1, next.
− Write Restrictions. Process j must exclude those transitions, say write(j, wj ), in which j changes the variables not
in wj . Hence, any time program transitions are computed
in Algorithm 1, we need to ensure that its transitions are
writable by some process in that program. For instance, write
restrictions affect Line 3 of Algorithm 2. Hence, this line is
modiﬁed to include only those transitions that some process
can write. Same restrictions also apply on Line 9, Line 11
and Line 7 in Algorithm 2. Also, Line 4 of Algorithm 1

85
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

turned on (c = 1, l = 1). Thus

is inadequate. These form a total order from safest to most
hazardous.
To illustrate graceful degradation, we focus on the key components of ventilation: central supply, central exhaust, vent cover,
local supply and local exhaust. For simplicity, we ignore the
exhaust booster. Speciﬁcally, if exhaust booster fails, we made
it as a failures of central exhaust system. Central supply and
exhaust are not controllable but other components are. Controllable
components have an actuation status (open/closed, on/off) and
controllability status (controllable or not). A component is declared
uncontrollable if an attempt to actuate it fails, and it remains
uncontrollable until an operator ﬁxes it and declares it controllable.
Controllability lets us know whether it can be actuated or whether
we have to adapt to its present status.

Sfbs = {s|(¬cc(s) ∧ c(s)) ∨ (¬lc(s) ∧ l(s))}
Notation. We use gas, vc, cc, lc|v, c, l to represent the state.
If a variable value is ‘∗’, it means it can be either 0 or 1. Thus,
1, 1, 1, 1|∗, 0, 1 denotes a state where gas is present; vent cover,
central exhaust and local exhaust are controllable; vent cover may
be open or closed, central exhaust is not in use and local exhaust
is in use.
2) Speciﬁcation. : There are two major requirements considered
critical in the system design. First of all, when gas hazardous is
detected, the lab should be isolated with the building (denoted as
Riso ), to prevent gas leak from the lab to the rest of the building.
Second, a poisonous gas must be exhausted from lab (denoted as
Rexh ) to outside air. These requirements are captured by Riso and
Rexh , where
− Riso = gas ⇒ ¬v, gas isolated.
− Rexh = gas ⇒ ((v ∧ c) ∨ l), gas exhausted.
Rexh is considered much more important than Riso since gases
like hydrogen and carbon monoxide can explode. Hence, we can
consider three requirements that are used in describing the graceful
behavior.
− Sf1 = Riso ∧ Rexh , where Sf1 is the ideal requirement
that should be satisﬁed whenever possible. In this state, any
leaked gas is exhausted while isolating the rest of building
from gas. This corresponds to status Safe described at the
beginning of this section.
− Sf2 = Rexh , where Sf2 is desirable when Sf1 cannot
be met, i.e., if isolation cannot occur then exhaust must be
provided. This corresponds to the status NotLocal described
at the beginning of this section.
− Sf3 = Riso ∨ Rexh , where Sf3 speciﬁes at least one of
the two requirements should be met. This corresponds to the
status UnsafeLab described at the beginning of this section.
Remark.
For brevity of presentation, we do not model
UnsafeCentral. To model it will require three different levels of
graceful degradation. However, our algorithm can be easily applied
in deriving this third level of graceful degradation.
3) Original program. : In the ideal scenario, there is no gas
leak and at least one of the exhaust systems is functioning correctly.
Moreover, since no gas is leaked, the vent is always open. For
efﬁciency reasons, whenever possible, the program chooses the
central exhaust. But it switches to the local exhaust if needed.
Thus, the program consists of three actions. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst
action turns on the central exhaust and turns off the local exhaust
when both are available. If only one of the exhaust is available,
the last two actions utilize the corresponding exhaust. The three
actions of the program are as shown in Table I.

A. Modeling Ventilation System
1) Variables. : Based on the assumption made by system
designers, either central supply or local supply is functioning and
it is acceptable to use either one or both. Moreover, the choice
of supply does not affect the status (Safe, NotLocal, etc.) of the
system. Hence, we only model the central exhaust and local exhaust
system. Hence, we introduce the variable cc (denoting whether
central exhaust is available to use, i.e., it has not been turned off
by building.) and variable lc (denoting whether local exhaust is
available to use, i.e., whether it is controllable). We also introduce
variable c (denoting whether the central exhaust system is being
used by the lab) and variable l (denoting whether the local exhaust
system is being used by the lab). Likewise, we introduce variables
v and vc to denote status of vent cover and its controllability.
Finally, the variable gas denotes whether hazardous gas exists at a
sufﬁciently high concentration. Thus, the variables are as follows:
− gas : {0, 1}: Gas hazard detected (gas = 1) or not (gas =
0).
− vc : {0, 1}: Vent controllable (vc = 1) or not (vc = 0).
− v : {0, 1}: Vent closed (v = 0) or open (v = 1).
− cc : {0, 1}: Central exhaust controllable (cc = 1) or not
(cc = 0).
− c : {0, 1}: Central exhaust in use (c = 1) or not (c = 0).
− lc : {0, 1}: Local exhaust controllable (lc = 1) or not (lc =
0).
− l : {0, 1}: Local exhaust in use (l = 1) or not (l = 0).
Thus, the state space of this program consists of all states
obtained by assigning each variable value from the domain. Additionally, when the context is clear, we would abuse C-style syntax,
that is ¬v evaluating to true if v = 0.
Based on the above modeling, we identify certain structural
constraints. These constraints describe limitations in terms of
transitions that a revised program can include. For example, if the
central exhaust is not controllable then the system cannot use it by
setting c = 1. Observe that this structural constraint can be modeled
as a set of transitions that the program cannot include. Hence,
during the synthesis algorithm, we model it as (an additional) safety
speciﬁcation that has to be satisﬁed by the revised program. The set
of (bad) transitions identifying the structural constraints are given
by the following set of transitions.

VI. A PPLICATION OF M ULTI -G RACEFUL D EGRADATION IN
OCRC
In this section, we present the technique of adding multigraceful degradation to program with multi-graceful-degradation
by applying Algorithm 1 on OCRC. First, we discuss the faults
in different severity and the expected requirements in the presence
of these faults. Then, specify corresponding relaxed speciﬁcations.
In particular, we split the whole synthesis progress into four parts
following Algorithm 1. In the end, we show the resulting program
and compare it with the original OCRC system design.

Sfbt = {(s0 , s1 )|(gas(s0 ) = gas(s1 )) ∨ (vc(s0 ) = vc(s1 ))
∨ (cc(s0 ) = cc(s1 )) ∨ (lc(s0 ) = lc(s1 ))}
In addition, program cannot reach certain states in which central/local exhaust is uncontrollable (cc = 0, lc = 0) while it is

86
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1.

Overview of OCRC Lab Safety System

¬gas ∧ lc ∧ cc ∧ (¬c ∨ l) −→ c := 1, l := 0
¬gas ∧ ¬lc ∧ cc ∧ ¬c −→ c := 1
¬gas ∧ lc ∧ ¬cc ∧ ¬l −→ l := 1

central exhaust is turned on if both controllable
central exhaust is turned on if local exhaust is uncontrollable
local exhaust is turned on if central exhaust is uncontrollable
Table I
ACTIONS OF FAULT- INTOLERANT P ROGRAM p

A. Faults

it would be impossible to satisfy Sf1 . Hence, if the system is
exposed to all four faults, the system may reach states that violate
Sf2 . However, all such states still satisfy Sf3 . Hence, the desired
graceful behavior in this context is one that satisﬁes the safety
speciﬁcation Sf3 and liveness speciﬁcation Lv2 := true  Sf2 .
Thus, the system design requires us to consider two classes of
faults. The ﬁrst class includes actions f1 and f2 . These faults are
combined into one class since requirements in their presence are
the same. And, the second class includes f1 , f2 , f3 and f4 .

Before adding graceful degradation to the program in Table I,
we identify the faults that may require one to provide a weaker
speciﬁcation. We consider four possible faults that affect the
system. Of these, the ﬁrst fault, f1 , corresponds to the case where
a gas leak occurs. The next two faults, f2 and f3 cause the
central and the local exhaust to become uncontrollable. When the
exhaust becomes unavailable/uncontrollable, the system receives a
notiﬁcation upon which the system must turn the corresponding
exhaust to off. Moreover, it cannot turn that exhaust on again
(except under manual intervention). Note that the assumption in
this system is that both the local and the central exhaust do not
become uncontrollable. This is captured in the modeling of fault
actions f2 and f3 . Finally, the last fault action, f4 , causes the vent
cover to be uncontrollable. This is a stuck-at fault that causes the
vent to remain in its current position. Its status cannot be changed
by the program. These faults are as shown in Table II.

C. Application of Algorithm 1
First, we identify the inputs for Algorithm 1.
− The fault-intolerant program p is same as those shown in
Table I.
− The invariant I is set of reachable states by p, which in
particular are represented as I = {s|¬gas(s)∧(l(s)∨(c(s)∧
v(s)))}
− In this case study, graceful behavior is desired only if gas is
present. Thus the set of state predicates Sa1 , Sa2 , · · · , San
are all set to {1, ∗, ∗, ∗|∗, ∗, ∗}.
− Faults are as described in Section VI-A and the relaxed
speciﬁcation is as described in Section VI-B.
Recall that Algorithm 1 utilizes a multi-step approach where
in each step, one class of faults is considered. The Algorithm 1
invokes Algorithm 2 on Line 3. This subroutine expands the behavior of the original program to add new behaviors that only satisfy
the weaker speciﬁcation. Subsequently, it utilizes this program to
add fault-tolerance in Line 4. Thus, for ease of understanding,
we partition the application of Algorithm 1 into four parts, given
below:
Part 1. (Line 3 in ﬁrst iteration of loop 2-13): Generate graceful
program pg1 , such that it satisﬁes safety speciﬁcation Sf2 and

B. Requirements in the presence of Faults
In this system, the ﬁrst graceful program, say pgf t1 , is designed
for the case where faults f1 and f2 occur. Observe that in the
presence of f1 and f2 , local exhaust and vent cover are still
controllable. Hence, we can eventually ensure both Riso and Rexh .
Note that in the presence of f1 and f2 , system may reach states that
violate Sf1 if f1 occurs while the central exhaust is being used.
But all such states are still in Sf2 . Hence, the desired graceful
behavior in this context is one that satisﬁes the safety speciﬁcation
Sf2 and liveness speciﬁcation Lv2 := true  Sf1 .
The second graceful program, say pgf t2 , is designed for the
case where all four faults can happen. If the local exhaust is
uncontrollable then it would be impossible to satisfy Sf1 when
a gas leak occurs. Likewise, if the vent cover cannot be closed,

87
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

f1 : ¬gas −→ gas := 1
f2 : cc ∧ lc −→ cc := 0, l := 1, c := 0
f3 : cc ∧ lc −→ lc := 0, l := 0, c := 1
f4 : vc −→ vc := 0
Table II
FAULTS

hazardous gas is detected
central exhaust loses its control
local exhaust is loses its control
vent cover loses its control

which ranks are ∞ are removed, i.e. those underlined states
in Figure 2.
− Iteration #2: Algorithm 2 applies no change in the next
iteration, thus the loop terminates.

liveness speciﬁcation Lv2 := true  Sf1 .
Part 2. (Line 4 in ﬁrst iteration of loop 2-13): Add fault-tolerance
to pg1 to obtain pgf t1 .
Part 3. (Line 3 in second iteration of loop 2-13): Generate graceful
program pg2 , such that it satisﬁes safety speciﬁcation Sf3 and
liveness speciﬁcation Lv3 := true  Sf2 .
Part 4. (Line 4 in second iteration of loop 2-13): Add faulttolerance to pg2 to obtain pgf t2 .
1) Part 1: Generation of Graceful Program pg1 . : To generate pg1 (on Line 3 of Algorithm 1), we invoke procedure
Gen gracef ul. Based on the inputs to Algorithm 1, the inputs
to the algorithm are as follows.

Therefore the remaining transitions (and states) together with
those in p (and in I) are returned as pg1 (and Ig1 ). We show
transitions of pg1 (except those shown in Table I) in Figure 2.
2) Part 2: Adding Fault-tolerance to pg1 . : To add faulttolerance, we use procedure Add masking as a black box. Thus
to illustrate the result of adding fault-tolerance, we ﬁrst consider
consider how the program can be perturbed to by faults, that
is set of reachable states by pg1 in the presence of f , where
f = f1 ∪ f2 ; then show that starting from all these reachable
states there are transitions provided by either original program p
or graceful program pg1 .
In the absence of faults, if only f1 occurs, the system reaches
one of the states in 1, 1, 1, 1|∗, ∗, ∗. Note that all these states are
generated in pg1 and have outgoing transition, thus f1 is tolerated.
In the absence of faults, if only f2 occurs, following transitions in
p, system switches to local exhaust, thus f2 is tolerated. If original
program perturbed by f1 and f2 together, the only state can be
perturbed to is 1, 1, 0, 1|1, 0, 1 which is generated in pg1 and
has an outgoing transition. Thus, there is no changes on Line 4 in
Algorithm 1.
3) Part 3: Generation of Graceful Program pg2 . : In this case,
we add fault-tolerance to the program generated in Part 2. The
inputs of program and invariant are selected from the ﬁrst iteration.
Faults consist of all four faults in Table II and the speciﬁcation in
the presence of faults is as speciﬁed in Section VI-B.
We do not elaboration the effect of Algorithm 2 again on pg2 .
Instead, we show set of newly discovered transitions and states in
pg2 (not including those in pg1 ) in Table III.

− Sa : As mentioned, Sa1 = {1, ∗, ∗, ∗|∗, ∗, ∗}.
− p: In the ﬁrst iteration (2-13), the program transitions for
gen gracef ul is the fault-intolerant program p.
− I: Same as the invariant identiﬁed for fault-intolerant program.
− specr1 : The relaxed speciﬁcation is a pair of safety speciﬁcation and liveness speciﬁcation.
– Relaxed Safety: We specify safety speciﬁcation as set of
bad states and bad transitions. First of all, we require that
program always satisﬁes Sf2 , thus states in ¬Sf2 are
not allowed. In addition, the relaxed safety speciﬁcation
should always contains structure constraints Sfbs and
Sfbt .
– Relaxed Liveness: We require program ensure both
exhaustion and isolation eventually, i.e. reach a states
satisfying Sf1 .
Hence specr1 := (¬Sf2 ∪ Sfbs , Sfbt ), true  Sf1 .
First on Line 1, we identify all the states in Sa satisfying Sfrbs .
These states are denoted as IΔ := ((v = 1 ∧ c = 1) ∨ (l =
1)) ∧ (cc = 0 → c = 0) ∧ (lc = 0 → l = 0). Then, I  includes all
states in I and IΔ . On Line 3, we obtain set of transitions satisfying
safety speciﬁcation. In particular, we show all the transitions in
Figure 2 (including solid and dashed arrow). Note that on Line
3, each states in IΔ is added with a self-loop transition. Now we
discuss the synthesis by loop (from Line 4 to Line 13) in different
iterations.

4) Part 4: Adding Fault-tolerance to pg2 .: For the brevity
of presentation, we do not illustrate the detail of adding faulttolerance. However, there are no new transitions added by
Add masking. Thus pgf t2 is same as pg2 .
D. Extension to deal with UnsafeCentral

− Iteration #1: By construction I only includes states where
no hazardous gas is present and IΔ only includes states
where hazardous gas is present. The program cannot write
the variable gas. Hence no transition from IΔ to I is
added on Line 7. There is no deadlock state identiﬁed in
this iteration on Line 8. To realize the effect of Line 11,
we ﬁrst assign the rank (using function rank) over each
state. According to Lv, states in Sf1 are assigned rank
0. Since both states 1, 1, 1, 1|1, 1, 1 and 1, 1, 1, 1|1, 0, 1
reach some states in Sf1 in one step, their ranks are 1.
Therefore the transition between them is removed on Line
11. Likewise, on Line 11, the self-loop transitions on states
1, 1, 1, 1|1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1|1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1|1, 0, 1 and
1, 1, 0, 1|1, 0, 1 are removed. On Line 12, those states of

To ﬁnalize the synthesis, we also consider the status of UnsafeCentral. In this case, neither isolation nor exhaust may be
satisﬁed, at least temporarily. Hence, the relaxed requirement does
not include any safety speciﬁcation. However, it includes a liveness
speciﬁcation, namely, true  Sf3 . Although we do not present the
application of Algorithm 1, we can easily obtain the corresponding
program by considering only another class of faults and applying
Algorithm 1 in a third iteration.
The state where Sf3 is violated is reached due to faults such as
transients. It could also be reached if both exhaust systems fail
temporarily. Algorithm 1 already handles this scenario as well.
Speciﬁcally, for this case, we need to model fault f5 as a transient
fault that requires the liveness speciﬁcation true  Sf3 . If we add
this as the third fault class and apply Algorithm 1, the resulting

88
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

gas, vc, cc, lc|v, c, l
: state
gas, vc, cc, lc|v, c, l
: removed state

1, 0, 1, 0|1, 1, 0

1, 1, 1, 0|1, 1, 0

1, 0, 0, 1|1, 0, 1

1, 0, 1, 1|1, 1, 0

1, 0, 1, 1|1, 1, 1

1, 0, 1, 1|1, 0, 1

: program transition

1, 1, 1, 1|1, 1, 0

1, 1, 1, 1|1, 1, 1

1, 1, 1, 1|1, 0, 1

Sf2

: removed transition

1, 1, 0, 1|0, 0, 1

1, 1, 0, 1|1, 0, 1

1, 0, 1, 1|0, 0, 1

1, 0, 1, 1|0, 1, 1

Figure 2.
1, 0, 1, 1|0, 1, 0
1, 0, 1, 1|0, 0, 0
1, 1, 0, 1|0, 0, 1
1, 1, 1, 1|0, 1, 0

→
→
→
→

Sf1

1, 1, 1, 1|0, 0, 1

1, 1, 1, 1|0, 1, 1

1, 0, 0, 1|0, 0, 1

Transitions of pg1 (except those shown in Table I)
1, 0, 1, 1|0, 1, 1
1, 0, 1, 1|0, 0, 1
1, 1, 0, 1|0, 0, 1
1, 1, 1, 1|0, 1, 1

1, 0, 0, 1|0, 0, 0 →
1, 1, 1, 0|0, 1, 0 →
1, 1, 1, 1|0, 0, 0 →
1, 1, 1, 0|0, 0, 0 →
Table III
N EWLY DISCOVERED TRANSITIONS IN PART 3

program is same as the ventilation system (i.e., the system except
alarms, status lights etc) of OCRC.

1, 0, 0, 1|0, 0, 1
1, 1, 1, 0|1, 1, 0
1, 1, 1, 1|0, 0, 1
1, 1, 1, 0|0, 1, 0

aims to circumvent the difﬁculties in composing components with
stabilizing requirements. A program is ideal stabilizing if all its
states are legitimate according to its speciﬁcation. For both ideal
speciﬁcation (allows all possible states) and non-ideal speciﬁcation
(allows parts of possible states), they propose two mapping apporaches which map program states to speciﬁcation states to reason
its ideal stabilizing properties. Our work differs from this work
in two aspects. First, the notion of multi-graceful degradation is
more general than ideal stabilization in the sense that in multigraceful program satisﬁes different speciﬁcations based on the
severity of faults. Second, our work focuses on the aspect of design
and revision while they focus on deﬁning ideal stabilization and
deﬁning its properties. If the given speciﬁcations are relaxed only
liveness speciﬁcations, our approach can be applied to synthesize
ideal stabilizing components.
Some existing work has also considered using graceful degradation to provide fault tolerance against unexpected failures. For
example in [19] authors consider the design of a distributed storage
systems. They propose two weaker consistency speciﬁcations, i.e.
Preﬁx Serializability and Subsequence Linearizability, to relax the
original one, namely Preﬁx Linearizability. They point out that a
system under the weaker consistency speciﬁcations achives more
availability in the sense that more legal states (though degraded)
are allowed. And, it can be considered to offer trade-off according
to the CAP theorem [20]. In [19], authors also present three
implementations for such systems under three speciﬁcations. By
modeling the faults under which one provides weaker level of
speciﬁcation, we can apply our synthesis approach in obtaining the
implemetation (one satisfying Subsequence Linearizability) from
another (one satisfying Preﬁx Serializability). Note that Subsequence Linearizability is weaker than Preﬁx Serializability.

VII. R ELATED W ORK
The work in this paper is closely related to that of controller
synthesis, game theory, automated addition of fault-tolerance and
graceful degradation in distributed computing. Controller synthesis
considers the following problem: Given two languages U (plant)
and D (desired system), identify a third language C (controller),
such that U ∩ D ⊆ C [10]. Thus, the goal is to begin with
the plant and add controller to obtain the desired system. The
idea of transforming a fault-intolerant system into a fault-tolerant
system using controller synthesis is was used in in [11]. Also in
[12], Girault and Rutten demonstrate the application of discrete
controller synthesis in automated addition of fault-tolerance in the
context of untimed systems. Our work in this paper differs from
this work in that we are trying to relax the speciﬁcation of the
given system whereas they are trying to strengthen it.
In the context of game theoretical approach for model revision,
program is automatically ﬁxed as a game [13], [14]. The game
is played on the model of two players [15], i.e., program and
environment. A program is considered to win the game if the
speciﬁcation is always satisﬁed no matter how the environment
interacts with the program. Game theoretic methods are generally
based on the theory of tree automata [16].
Our work is also a generalization of multitolerance [17]. The
notion of multitolerance is based on the idea of providing failsafe,
nonmasking and masking tolerance to individual faults. By contrast,
the notion of multi-graceful degradation allows us to capture more
general requirements. This work is also more general than that in
[4] in that the notion of fault-tolerance is not considered in [4]. By
contrast, this paper focuses on providing multi-graceful degradation
to several types of faults.
We obtain a multi-graceful fault-tolerant program by synthesizing and composing multiple programs that provide degradation.
In [18], Nesterenko and Tixeuil advocate ideal stabilization which

VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we focused on automated addition multi-graceful
degradation to a fault-intolerant program. Designing multi-graceful
degradation introduces several challenges. First, unlike tolerances

89
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

such as failsafe, nonmasking and masking, in multi-graceful degradation, the given program may not include behaviors that the repaired program can use after recovery is complete. For this reason,
we need to relax the given program so that it satisﬁes a reduced
speciﬁcation. In other words, one needs to generate a graceful
version of the given program. Another challenge in multi-graceful
degradation is that the requirements in the presence of faults vary.
Hence, it is necessary to generate several graceful programs and
ensure that depending upon which fault have occurred, the revised
program satisﬁes the required speciﬁcation.
We presented an algorithm for automated addition of multigraceful degradation to an existing program. This program performed the task in a stepwise manner where we considered the least
severe faults for which most of the original speciﬁcation needed
to be satisﬁed. Then, in each subsequent step, we consider more
severe faults for which the requirements were relaxed/reduced.
We illustrated the problem in the context of a case study from
the ventilation system at Ohio Coal Research Center. This system
was designed to protect personnel and facilities by detecting the
presence of explosive and/or toxic gas and either dealing with
it, or by alerting lab personnel and emergency responders. We
focused on the ventilation system of at OCRC. We began with a
fault-intolerant version of this system where no gases have leaked
and all components are functioning correctly. Then, we used our
algorithms to add multi-graceful degradation. We achieved this by
using two classes of faults. We applied our algorithms to provide
multi-graceful degradation to these two classes of faults. Moreover,
the ﬁnal program synthesized thus is the same as that designed
manually for the ventilation system at Ohio Coal Research Center.
This approach is also more general than that in [5], [6], [7].
Speciﬁcally, in this work, failsafe, nonmasking or masking faulttolerance has been considered. And, as discussed earlier in the
paper, the notion of multi-graceful degradation is more general than
these tolerances. The case study in this paper could not be designed
using algorithms in [5], [6] due to the fact that when faults occur,
it is impossible for the program to recover to its original behavior.
Also, this work is more general than [4] in that [4] only considers
the problem of designing graceful program. It does not address the
issue of fault-tolerance (or multi-graceful degradation).

[7] F. C. Gärtner and A. Jhumka, “Automating the addition of
fail-safe fault-tolerance: Beyond fusion-closed speciﬁcations,” in
FORMATS/FTRTFT, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Y. Lakhnech and S. Yovine, Eds., vol. 3253. Springer, 2004,
pp. 183–198.
[8] Y. Lin and S. Kulkarni, “Tech report: Automation of
fault-tolerant graceful degradation.” [Online]. Available: http:
//www.cse.msu.edu/∼linyiyan/srds12/main.pdf
[9] W. Leal, M. McCreery, and D. Faria, “The ocrc fuel cell
lab safety system: a self-stabilizing safety-critical system,” in
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Stabilization,
safety, and security of distributed systems, ser. SSS’11. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 326–340. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2050613.2050638
[10] P. J. Ramadge and W. M. Wonham, “The control of discrete event
systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 81–98,
1989.
[11] K. H. Cho and J. T. Lim, “Synthesis of fault-tolerant supervisor for automated manufacturing systems: A case study on
photolithography process,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 348–351, 1998.
[12] A. Girault and É. Rutten, “Automating the addition of fault
tolerance with discrete controller synthesis,” Formal Methods in
System Design (FMSD), vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 190–225, 2009.
[13] A. Pnueli and R. Rosner, “On the synthesis of a reactive module,”
in Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), 1989, pp. 179–
190.
[14] B. Jobstmann, A. Griesmayer, and R. Bloem, “Program repair as
a game,” in Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁcation (CAV),
2005, pp. 226–238, LNCS 3576.
[15] W. Thomas, “On the synthesis of strategies in inﬁnite games.”
in Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS), 1995, pp.
1–13.
[16] ——, Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science: Chapter 4,
Automata on Inﬁnite Objects. Elsevier Science Publishers B. V.,
1990.

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Herlihy and J. M. Wing, “Specifying graceful degradation,”
IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 93–104,
1991.

[17] A. Ebnenasir and S. S. Kulkarni, “Feasibility of stepwise design
of multitolerant programs,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.,
vol. 21, no. 1, p. 1, 2011.

[2] B. Alpern and F. B. Schneider, “Deﬁning liveness,” Information
Processing Letters, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 181 – 185, 1985.

[18] M. Nesterenko and S. Tixeuil, “Ideal stabilization,” CoRR, vol.
abs/0906.1947, 2009.

[3] A. Arora and M. G. Gouda, “Closure and convergence: A
foundation of fault-tolerant computing,” IEEE Trans. Software
Eng., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1015–1027, 1993.

[19] L. Zhou, V. Prabhakaran, V. Ramasubramanian, R. Levin, and
C. A. Thekkath, “Graceful degradation via versions: speciﬁcations
and implementations,” in Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual
ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing, ser.
PODC ’07. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 264–273.

[4] Y. Lin and S. S. Kulkarni, “Automatic generation of graceful
degradation,” in International Symposium on Reliable Distributed
Systems, 2012.

[20] E. A. Brewer, “Lessons from giant-scale services,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 46–55, Jul. 2001. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/4236.939450

[5] S. S. Kulkarni and A. Arora, “Automating the addition of faulttolerance,” in Formal Techniques in Real-Time and Fault-Tolerant
Systems (FTRTFT), 2000, pp. 82–93.
[6] B. Bonakdarpour and S. S. Kulkarni, “Exploiting symbolic techniques in automated synthesis of distributed programs,” in In
IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2007, pp. 3–10.

90
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana. Downloaded on July 02,2026 at 14:08:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

