Graceful Degradation in the Presence of Exceptions
Nikolas Nehmer
University of Kaiserslautern
Department of Computer Sscience
P.O. Box 3049, 67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
nnehmer@informatik.uni-kl.de
+49 (0) 631 - 205 2644

Abstract
In today’s software development processes, exception
handling is mostly considered as an issue of minor importance. Furthermore, explicit and systematic exception handling strategies and tool-support for reasoning about exception flow and exception compatibility between components
are very rare. Nevertheless exceptions not handled appropriately can seriously harm a software system – uncaught
exceptions for example usually lead to a crash or shutdown
of the whole system. In this paper a novel approach to systematic exception handling using appropriate tool-support
is presented. Static code analysis is used to detect and identify exception handling related problems. Identifying and
isolating affected data structures during runtime is a major part of this approach. A generic system-mechanism restricting error propagation to contain the fault’s impact on
the overall system is introduced. The overall objective is to
achieve graceful degradation in the presence of exceptions
of any kind.
keywords: exception handling, graceful degradation,
dynamic fault containment, static code analysis, exception
propagation
submission category: regular paper

1

Introduction

Exception-handling is a programming language construct or computer hardware mechanism designed to handle
the occurrence of conditions that change the normal flow of
program-execution. The condition raising the control-flow
change is called an exception. In general exceptions are
used for signaling error (exceptional) conditions.
Unfortunately, the presence failures[2] is a fact of life
today’s software has to deal with. Modern programming
languages such as C#[9], C++[23] or Java[7] provide ex-

plicit exception handling mechanisms as programming language constructs to handle these exceptional conditions and
to ease the difficulty of developing robust software systems.
Exception-handling mechanisms provide means for raising
exceptional conditions explicitly and means for specifying blocks of code to handle one or more of these exceptional conditions[6]. Handling exceptions includes a variety of different means; from sending simple error notification messages to client applications to complex forward error recovery mechanisms. In general, exception-handling
mechanisms are intended to make developers design and
build more robust and dependable software systems by separating code regions that handle unusual system behavior
on the one hand from code that deals with normal processing on the other hand. This separation of concerns leads to
consequences for system design. As exceptions are not necessarily handled at the place of their occurrence, exceptions
can flow to an arbitrary point within the system and even
beyond system boundaries if they are not handled appropriately. Developers must be aware of every exception type
possibly raised at any program point or that can be propagated to it from lower-level modules. Some exceptionhandling techniques provided by current programming languages like Java help developers in this reasoning process
by adding exception information to the method declarations, for example. Common compilers make use of exception declarations to check whether the corresponding exception handlers are provided by a client application.
Anyhow, this kind of exception-handling support provided by a multitude of programming languages is insufficient for several reasons.
• Unspecific throws – Modern object-oriented languages
allow sub-typing of exceptions which may lead to unspecific throws.
• Implicit catches – The classification of exceptions into
type hierarchies complicate reasoning about exception
structures and may lead to implicit catches[17].

• Exception handling “ad hoc” – developers have to deal
with exception handling without tool or infrastructure
support. A default exception handling mechanism at
the programming language runtime level is missing.

“Real world” examples such as Windows blue-screens
or the crash of the Ariane 5[15, 12] rocket illustrate the
possible impact of inappropriate exception handling on the
overall system dependability. The impact reaches from data
or content loss in office or mail applications to catastrophic
crashes of air carriers or erroneous medical equipment compromising human life. This clarifies the need for a systematic and defensive approach to exception handling. In the
following some meaningful examples are given.
Everyday life software - The first example that comes in
mind when thinking of inappropriate exception handling is
software used in everyday life such as windows, office applications or computer games. In windows uncaught exceptions often end up in the well known blue-screen leaving up
the user with a listing of affected memory areas and a textual hint on how to restart the computer. In office applications or applications like computer games uncaught exceptions often just terminate the main application (including
side effects such as loosing data) and a simple stack trace is
displayed on a pop-up window. It seems that the exception
handling strategy used in both examples does not improve
the system overall dependability. An illustrating screen shot
is given below in figure 1.

• Uncaught exceptions – In some programming languages like Java checked and unchecked exceptions
are distinguished. Unchecked exceptions bypass the
compiler-check and consequently developers of client
modules are not forced to handle these exceptions
types. This fact may lead to uncaught exceptions. If
exceptions are not handled appropriately and hence
flow through the system until they reach the system’s
entry point the program’s execution will be aborted immediately. Crashing the entire software system is the
usual fate of uncaught exceptions.
Uncaught exceptions may have the most fatal and obvious impact on the system behavior. But beyond that,
there are further shortcomings regarding exception handling
mechanisms in today’s programming languages. The list
below mentions a few:
• Stack trace propagation harms trust (e.g. in service oriented architectures based on today’s web service technology)
• No clear responsibilities for exception handling
• Exception hierarchy is futile (often only applicable to
academic examples)
• Without strict programming discipline, improper handling of exceptions will jeopardize the stability of the
system
– Throw – catch without handling – rethrow the
same exception or a superclass (wrapping exceptions often only applicable to academic examples)

Figure 1. Microsoft Office Error
Therac 25 - The Therac 25[14] was a medical linear accelerator used as a radiation therapy machine for the treatment of cancer in several US and Canadian hospitals. It
was involved in at least six known accidents between 1985
and 1987, in which at least six patients were given massive
overdoses of radiation, three of them died afterwards. The
failure of the radiation therapy machine is based on one of
the most momentous software errors in history. The machine offered two operational modes - electron mode and
photon (or x-ray) mode.
When operating in the photon mode, the machine was
designed to rotate four components into the path of the electron beam - especially a target, which converted the high
energy electron beam into low energy x-rays. The accidents occurred when the high-power electron beam was activated for x-ray therapy, without the target having been ro-

– Catch {} with an empty handler
– Decorating methods with “throws Exception”
where Exception is the superclass of all exceptions
• Only a few reasonable handling patterns for exceptions
(decentralized error handling leads to redundant code
at different places e.g. user notification)
– User notification
– Graceful degradation
– Application specific error handling
• Unstable interfaces (e.g. adding exceptions)
• Scalability issues (especially in systems of systems)
2

tated into place. Consequently, a potentially lethal dose of
radiation was applied to the patients. Each incident had a
similar pathology. The operator initiated the treatment, but
received an error message indicating that no dose had been
applied. Accustomed to the machine’s quirky behavior, operators were used to retry by pressing the “try again”-button
several times. In fact, the radiation machines were applying
a dose on each trial with radiation levels sometimes 30 to
100 times higher than originally desired. The root cause of
this disaster was a complex chain of events. The software
failures were mostly due to dynamic issues resulting from
concurrency aspects including a race condition initiated by
the operator’s quick handling of the machine. Nevertheless,
inappropriate exception handling displaying an error message indicating that no dose had been applied (which in fact
was absolutely wrong), contributes to the chain of events.

gation information from component code. Secondly, system
runtime mechanisms have to be made available to provide
means for automatic fault containment by building quarantine areas around “infected” data structures during runtime.
In this paper a novel and systematic approach to coping with some of the shortcomings mentioned above is presented. Especially reasoning about exception propagation
within applications using a graph-based static code analysis approach is emphasized. The aim of the graph-based
analysis is to identify exception related problems such as
uncaught exceptions and long exception propagation paths.
The information extracted from the code analysis should be
used for static code repair as well as for dynamic fault containment purposes collecting and isolating ”infected” data
structures during runtime as introduced in this paper. A default exception handling mechanism based on the concept of
graceful degradation is proposed. The concepts presented in
this paper are illustrated using the Java programming model
but can easily be generalized.
The reminder of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section 2 related work in the field of exception analysis is
presented and discussed. Section 3 is threefold. It deals
with a novel graph-based static code analysis approach and
presents a generic approach to dynamic fault containment.
Furthermore some basic principles and concepts defining
the underlying exception model are introduced. Section 4
briefly summarizes and highlights the contribution of the
paper. Furthermore it gives an outlook on future work.

Ariane 5 crash - On June 4th, 1996, the maiden flight 501
of the European Ariane 5[15, 12] launcher crashed about 40
seconds after takeoff. This crash was arguably one of the
most expensive software errors in history causing a loss of
roughly 0.5 Billion $. An international inquiry board analyzed the accident, identifying the root cause as a chain of
events - an out-of-range data condition in a software module
that was not even needed during the crash (reusing Ariane
4 software) raised an uncaught exception. This uncaught
exception lead to a subsequent automatic shutdown of critical subsystems which lead to the catastrophic crash of the
carrier. Again inappropriate exception handling caused an
accident.

2

Exception handling is a very complex and poorly toolsupported task for software developers. Although in programming languages such as Java compilers help in reasoning about exception flow, many problems related to typesubsumption, unchecked exceptions or uncaught exceptions
have to be detected and resolved by the developers manually during the development process and even still persist
undetected in deployed software systems. Especially in today’s large and complex systems, systems of systems, component architectures or particularly in service oriented architectures reasoning about exception propagation and exception flow without proper tool-support seems to be unmanageable. For some reason, exception handling is often
not considered high priority when building systems. This
is because architectures can be viewed as having two sides
– positive and negative. The positive side includes algorithms and functions; the negative side includes handling
exceptional conditions. Perhaps it is because exception handling does not deliver tangible functionality to users. System mechanisms supporting software developers in this reasoning process and in designing robust software systems
by establishing sound exception handling mechanisms are
strongly required.First of all, developers need tool- and
infrastructure-support that helps deriving exception propa-

Related Work

Various static analysis tools and concepts have been proposed to address problems related to exception handling in
different programming languages making different assumptions on execution types and programming model. In this
related work section Java related approaches analyzing synchronous exceptions are discussed. Of course, any Java
compiler has limited exception handling analysis capabilities as well. For space reasons the discussion is limited to
more advanced approaches.
Ryder et al.[20] have developed the Java Exception
Static Profiler (JESP), a tool-suit meant to statically analyze
the frequency of exception handling construct-occurrences
in Java programs. Their studies show a frequent usage of
exception handling constructs in Java programs and emphasizes the need for a more systematic approach to handling
exceptions. Sinha and Herrold’s[22] study on the occurrence of try and throw statements in a set of seven different
Java programs confirm this statement.
Robillard and Murphy[18] have developed JEX, a tool
for static code analysis of Java exception flows. The Jextool extracts information about the exception structure in
Java programs, providing views of the exception structure
3

and exception handlers that are present. Their approach includes checked exceptions as well as unchecked exceptions.
Jex aims at providing exception information at any point in
the program hierarchy and therefore is designed at statement level.
Chang et al.[5, 13] have introduced an interprocedural
exception analyzer based on the set-based framework[8].
Their approach estimates uncaught exceptions independently of exceptions declared in the method header. Their
analysis determines the types of exceptions propagated by
a method and proves to be more precise than the one offered by the Java compiler. The analysis, however, does
not include the flow of exceptions and is limited to checked
exceptions. In [4] Chang et al. have presented a tool to visualize exception propagation on method level in Java programs. For a selected method the visualization displays textual information on uncaught checked exceptions.
The set-based approaches presented in the related work
section are mostly limited to the analytical part supporting
developers in reasoning about exception propagation and
building more dependable and robust software. Static code
analysis is used to detect drawbacks related to exception
handling - solving the problems is still left up to the developer. The graph-based concepts proposed in this paper
go one step further and introduces a default exception handling mechanisms as a fall-back strategy to cover uncaught
exceptions or exceptions handled inappropriately on the application level.

3

possible exception occurrences and corresponding exception handlers to code blocks in the calling hierarchy of a
software system. A graph representation of the information given above can be derived by parsing a program’s
abstract syntax tree. This graph structure can be used to
gain exception-flow information. A static analysis of this
graph can be applied to detect exception related problems
like uncaught exceptions, long propagation paths, unspecific catches or exception incompatibilities between components.
Today’s exception handling mechanisms exclusively located on the application level are highly error prone as illustrated in the introduction. Consider an uncaught unchecked
arithmetic exception raised in a subcomponent (as it was the
case in the Ariane 5 accident). This exception would normally flow to the system entry point and terminate the system runtime. Consequently, some general fall-back mechanisms have to be established to back-up customized application level exception handling mechanisms. In general,
these default exception handling mechanisms will not substitute customized application specific exception handlers
but restrict error impact in the overall system if customized
exception handlers are inappropriate or just missing. In
the example given above the uncaught exception should be
detected immediately, caught automatically and access to
the data structures affected by the exception should be prevented. Generic exception handling functionality has to be
provided by frameworks or has to be integrated into programming language runtimes and compilers directly. These
runtime mechanisms have to cope with problem cases such
as uncaught exceptions based on a generically applicable
mechanism. Automatic fault containment is one approach
of generically handling errors and restricting their impact
on the overall system dynamically during runtime.

Exception flow analysis and fault containment

Software developers have to be aware of typesubsumption, potentially raised exceptions, exception handlers and their interrelationship within the system’s calling
hierarchy at any arbitrary program point. Exception flow,
exception dependencies or exception handling responsibilities within a system and even beyond system boundaries
have to be transparently identifiable. The desired exception
transparency can only be achieved by computer-aided support mechanisms. The required tool-support would serve
software developers during the whole development process
of a software system, especially during implementation and
for failure analysis. For exception flow analysis several
aspects are of great importance – implicitly and explicitly
raised exceptions, exception handlers, the exception hierarchy, the calling hierarchy of a component and especially
the interrelationship of these entities. This information can
directly be derived from a program’s source code. A program’s abstract syntax tree (AST) is a logic tree representation (finite, labeled, directed tree) of a program’s source
code. Consequently, static code analysis based on an abstract syntax tree representation is used to exactly relate

The problem cases detected by a static code analysis
can be tackled in different ways. Obviously, the problems
can be solved by ruling out the root cause and adapting or
changing the source code. This approach is mostly applicable during development (optionally during maintenance) for
systems with full code access only. But at this point several
questions should be raised. Does a developer really want to
tackle all the problems by ruling out the root cause? Is it
reasonable to handle all kinds of exceptions by application
specific error handlers? Regarding these questions, at first,
checked and unchecked exceptions have to be distinguished
conceptually. In Java for example checked exceptions are
usually handled in some way because the compiler enforces
checked exceptions to be treated - either locally or by upward propagation. For some reason, exception handling is
often not considered high priority in a software development process. Accordingly, even checked exceptions are
not handled appropriately resulting in runtime problems described above (long propagation paths, imprecise catches,
4

etc.). In general unchecked exceptions such as runtime exceptions (e.g. null pointer exceptions or array out of bounds
exceptions) or system errors (e.g. io-exceptions) can hardly
be handled appropriately on the application level. Hence,
this type of exceptions is mostly ignored by developers regarding exception handling. Nevertheless an uncaught runtime exception or system error will also lead to the problems discussed earlier such as system crashes. To avoid
these extensive consequences in both cases (for checked and
unchecked exceptions) exceptions should be analyzed and
a systematic and automatic default system-level exception
handling mechanism (i.e. on an abstraction layer below the
application level such as the programming language runtime) has to be provided.
A systematic and automatic exception handling mechanism located on the system level calls for a generic exception handling approach. Consequently, this means that
recovery mechanisms such as application specific forward
recovery that require semantics are inappropriate. Approaches based on semantic context information are hardly
applicable to the general case. A generic exception handling mechanism gracefully degrading system functionality
by avoiding uncaught exceptions and improving fault containment by identifying and isolating affected code blocks
is required. When an exception is raised during runtime
the affected data structures have to be identified and access
to these data structures has to be restricted or completely
prevented. The question if a raised exception can be handled by application specific handlers and the identification
of affected data structures can be supported by using the
graph-structure resulting from the exception flow analysis.
Access restriction can be achieved by dynamically activating pre-deployed protective wrappers during runtime. The
wrappers’ duty is to build a quarantine area around affected
data structures by restricting client access.
Both approaches – ”development”-tools and runtime
mechanisms are based on an analysis of the exception flow.
Exception flow information can be derived from a system’s
source code directly. Basically, both approaches are based
on a detailed abstract syntax tree analysis to detect exception related problem cases. During the analysis the abstract
syntax tree is transformed into a simplified and more abstract graph representation containing exception flow related information - calling hierarchy, exception hierarchy,
exceptions and exception handlers and their relationship (as
depicited in figure 2).

3.1

Figure 2. Basic Strategy
ing multi-threading) as a reference programming language.
Consequently, the approach is based on the Java programming and exception model but it can easily be adapted to
other programming languages. A detailed description of
the Java exception and programming model goes beyond
the scope of this work. The key assumptions are:
• Exceptions as objects (including type subsumption) [1]
• Termination model[3, 17]
• Checked and unchecked exceptions including programmed application specific exceptions, errors and
runtime exceptions (aka implicit and explicit exceptions)
• Synchronous exceptions (asynchronous exceptions
raised by concurrent threads for example are beyond
the scope of this paper)

3.2

Detailed Strategy

This section gives a detailed insight into graph-based exception handling analysis and a dynamic fault containment
approach in the presence of exceptions. Exception handling
analysis can be regarded as a compile-time issue while fault
containment is considered a runtime issue.
3.2.1

Compile-time Issues – Static code analysis

The basic idea is to analyze component code to detect
exception handling related problems during compile-time.
A transparent representation of possible exceptions raised,
handled and handed on at any arbitrary program point is
the outcome of such analysis. In object oriented programming languages a reasonable scope for exception handling
analysis are methods synthesizing all exceptions encountered within the scope of the method, the exceptions caught
within the scope including subtypes and the exceptions
thrown or handed on beyond the scope of the method (including uncaught or undeclared exceptions). The static
code analysis is based on the abstract syntax tree of component code. Information about exceptions required to identify exception flow includes:

Exception Model

The concepts proposed in this paper are based on some
assumptions expressed in the underlying exception model
briefly described in this section. Basically, the approach
presented in this paper is illustrated using Java (not includ-

• method call dependencies – aka system calling hierarchy
5

• the scope and hierarchy of try blocks
• the expression raising the exception
• contains-relationships between method calls, expressions and try blocks
• the exact location in the calling hierarchy where exceptions are raised
• exact location in the calling hierarchy of exception
handlers
Figure 3. Exception Call Graph Model

• the exception identifier and the exception hierarchy to
reason about type-subsumption

simply mapped to classes and methods in the model where
one class is composed of zero to n methods and a method
belongs to exactly one class. According to the UML-metamodel all “has-a”-relationships in the model are strong association relationships corresponding to compositions in the
UML meta-model. A composition has a strong life cycle
dependency between instances of the container entity and
instances of the contained entity. A method in the ECGM
always corresponds to exactly one scope. A scope is defined as an atomic control flow sphere. Every exception
encountered within scope not associated to a handler flows
to the boundary of the scope without further modifying the
control flow of the program. In the following an expression potentially raising an exception is referred to as failable
expression - this includes e.g. arithmetic expressions raising arithmetic exceptions such as division by zero or throw
statements raising new exceptions. A scope consists of zero
to n method calls and zero to n failable expressions. A scope
potentially contains zero to n further guarded scopes. A
”guarded” scope is defined as a scope explicitly preventing
(or catching) explicitly defined exceptions from propagating to the enclosing scope. In the exception graph model a
guarded scope manifests itself by strongly associating one
to n exception handler entities. Handlers and failable expressions are assigned to exactly one scope and are directly
associated with an exception entity expressing the exception raised or handled respectively. Every handler contains
a new default scope. Exceptions are associated to themselves to represent the exception type hierarchy. A method
call is associated to exactly one method. Possibly exceptions propagated by a method call are mapped by the transitive relation between method, scope and all containing entities. To ease the understanding of the model and to support
reasoning about exception propagation some definitions are
given below:

A graph containing and relating this information – from
now on called the exception call graph (ECG) – can be
directly derived from a component’s abstract syntax tree.
The ECG represents a component’s calling hierarchy related
to possibly raised exceptions and corresponding exception
handlers. Unfortunately there is no common AST in Java
provided by Sun. The proof of concept for the approach
proposed in this paper will be based on eclipse framework’s
DOM representation of Java code. To properly analyze the
ECG regarding exception related problems the ECG has to
be extended by exception propagation information. Therefore every node and edge within the ECG is annotated with
exception information and exception propagation information identifying the exception’s source and the propagation
path. The annotated version of the exception call graph
(ECG) is known as the exception propagation graph (EPG).
Both, ECG and EPG, are directed labeled graphs potentially
containing cycles.
To support static and dynamic reasoning about exception
flow in object oriented languages a general model of exception handling structures and their occurrence in a program’s
calling hierarchy is presented (hence referred to as exception call graph model - ECGM). The goal of the model is
to provide a unified and sound basis for discussing problems related to the design and implementation of exception
handling mechanisms. Furthermore it eases reasoning about
exception handling related problems by abstraction. The exception call graph’s and the exception propagation graph’s
structures are based on this model. The model is adapted
from the work by Schaefer and Bundy[21] and closely related to the work by Robillard and Murphy[19]. The focus
of the model is on the description of all entities required for
the modeling of exception propagation in a program. The
model is depicted in figure 3 and a detailed description is
given below.
In the structural exception call graph model (ECGM) object oriented language constructs are mapped to model entities. Relationships between entities are modeled as directed
associations and compositions. Classes and methods are

• scope s = (Cs , Fs , Ss , Hs ) where Cs is the set of all
method calls directly contained in the scope s, Fs is the
set of all failable expressions directly contained in the
scope s, Ss is the set of all scopes directly contained
6

in the scope s, Hs is the set of all handlers associated
with scope s

the rest of this paper, the Java language constructs are described in terms of the general model. In Java every class
and method corresponds to a class and method entity in the
exception call graph model. A Java method spans the default outer scope. Every try-block within the method (outer
scope) is mapped to a guarding scope associated to the corresponding exception handler entities. Every try-block may
contain further try-blocks expressed by nesting scopes in
the model. A handler in the model corresponds to a catchblock in Java; the associated exception matches the exception caught by the catch expression. A handler spans a new
default scope possibly containing further guarded scopes
(aka try-blocks). A Java method or try-block in general contains method calls or failable expressions. Failable expressions in Java are expressions implicitly or explicitly raising exceptions. Explicitly raised exceptions correspond to
throw statements; implicitly raised exceptions correspond
to exceptions that can be raised by the runtime as shown in
the Java Language Specification[7]. A method call propagates all exceptions possibly encountered within a method‘s
scope and a method scope’s child scopes that are uncaught.
The mapping of Java language constructs to the exception
call graph model is informally summarized in the following:

• (sD ) = the default scope not associated with a handler
• method m = (sD ) where sD is the default scope
• handler h = (sD ) where sD is the default scope
• failable expression f := expression potentially raising
an exception
• call c := control flow transition to a method
• exception e := entity representing an exceptional condition
• Ex = {e|e raised in the context of x}
Furthermore, some functions are defined as follows:
encounters : S → E

(1)

encounters(s) =
raises(s) ∪ propagates(s) ∪ uncaught(s)

(2)

• Java class → ECGM class
raises : S → E
[
raises(s) =
raises(f )

(3)

• Java method → ECGM method + ECGM scope

(4)

• Java try-block → ECGM scope

∀f ∈Fs

where raises(f ) = {e|e ∈ Ef }

(5)

• Java catch → ECGM handler
• Java exception → ECGM exception

propagates : S → E
[
propagates(s) =
propagates(c)

• Java potentially exception raising expression →
ECGM failable expression

(6)
(7)

• Java method call → ECGM method call

∀c∈Cs

where propagates(c) = encounters(sD )

(8)

• Java finally-block → ECGM scope
• Java throw statement → ECGM failable expression

uncaught : S → E
uncaught(s) = encounters(s) − catch(s)

catches : S → E
[
catches(s) =
chatches(s)

(9)
(10)

Basically, the ECG’s and EPG’s structure is based on the
exception call graph model. Graph node types correspond
to the entities described by the model. Graph edges are
modeled by associations within the ECGM. Deriving the
ECG from the abstract syntax tree is a straight forward approach. The abstract syntax tree is parsed and the required
information is extracted. According to the mapping rules
described above step by step the statements in the abstract
syntax tree are parsed and new nodes with corresponding
directed edges are inserted. The exception hierarchy is directly derived from the abstract syntax tree as well. Finally,
the ECG represents a program’s calling hierarchy consisting
of class, method and scope nodes mainly. Method calls are
represented by directed edges to the corresponding method

(11)
(12)

∀h∈Hs

where catches(h) = {e|e ∈ Eh }

(13)

To illustrate how the exception handling mechanisms
and the calling hierarchy of a real programming language
are mapped onto the general exception call graph model
and to ease the understanding of the concepts proposed in
7

nodes. Exceptions raised explicitly or implicitly or caught
are embodied by directed edges to the adequate exception
nodes.
To support reasoning about exception propagation the
ECG containing the required exception and call structure
of a program as described above is analyzed and annotated
with exception path information (epi). Of course, the exception path information contains the exception type as well
as the exception source. If an exception is propagated the
exception path information includes the exception propagation path according to the calling hierarchy. According to
[4] the exception path information is formally described as:
epi = exception × propagation path

1
2

3
4

5
6
7

8
9

(14)

where exception = exception identifier × expression
(15)
and propagation path = method*

10
11

12

To annotate the exception path information to the exception
call graph the following algorithm is applied. Starting from
the exception nodes the directed edges are traced back and
the exception path information is annotated to the edges.
Reaching a node, the exception path information contained
in all the node’s outgoing edges is subsumed and exceptions
handled by a corresponding handler are removed building a
node’s exception path information set (epis). Consequently,
every node is annotated with a set of potentially raised exceptions containing the exception source and propagation
path. All the node’s incoming edges are traced back again
and the edges are annotated with the exception path information subsumed in the node’s exception path information
set. This algorithm is repeated until the system’s entry point
is reached. The exception propagation information set at
the root node (system entry point) exactly shows which exceptions are potentially propagated beyond the scope of the
system and exactly show the exceptions’ origins and propagation paths. A pseudo code illustration of this simplified
algorithm is depicted in listing 1.
The algorithm described in listing 1 is simple and
straight forward and terminates for acyclic graphs. But general calling hierarchies as represented by the ECG might
contain cyclic references – i.e. programs containing recursive or cyclic method calls. If a graph contains cycles the
algorithm shown above will not terminate. An improved annotation algorithm has to mark already visited nodes to detect cyclic relationships and stop to follow such paths again.
The exception call graph (ECG) and exception propagation
graph(EPG) respectively can be regarded as a deterministic
finite state machine or automata (DFA) represented by the
5-tupel A = (Q, Σ, δ, q0 , F ) [11], where

13

14
15

Start at every exception node
Annotate the exception path information(sets) to all incoming edges
Trace back all incoming edges
Reaching a node, adapt and extend exception
path information according to:
switch (node.type) {
case failable expression:
add expression information
to the exception path
information
case method:
add method information to
the exception path
information
case handler:
negate exception path
information
}
Build a set from all incoming exception
path information(-sets) excluding
negated exception path information (
considering sub-typing!)
Continue with step in line 2
The algorithm stops when reaching the entry
point

Listing 1. Exception Propagation Information
– Annotation Algorithm

• δ is the transition function δ : Q × Σ → Q
• q0 is the start state
• F is a set of states of Q (i.e. F ⊆ Q)
Finite state machines are closely related and correspond
to regular expressions. Regular expressions can be seen as
algebraic descriptions of languages. It can be proved that if
L = L(A) for an arbitrary DEA A there is a corresponding
regular expression R with L = L(R) where L is a language
over Σ [11]. Consequently, the propagation path expressions can easily be expressed by using regular expressions
representing the potentially cyclic subgraph.
Basically, in this subsection a novel graph-based approach to exception flow analysis was presented. A graph
representation (exception call graph) of a program’s calling
hierarchy, related exceptions and exception handlers are derived from the abstract syntax tree. To support reasoning
about exception propagation this graph structure is annotated with exception path information resulting in the exception propagation graph. This interrelation is depicted
schematically in figure 4.

• Q is the finite set of states represented by methods
• Σ is the finite set of symbols represented by method
calls
8

Figure 4. Exception Flow Analysis
1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

class MyDemo{
public static void main(String[] args )
throws E2 {
try {
myMethod1( );
} catch (E1 e) { ; }
. . .
myMethod3( );
}
void myMethod1( ) throws E1{
myMethod2( );
}
void myMethod2( ) throws E1{
throw new E1();
}
void myMethod3( ) throws E2 {
if (...) throw new E2();
if (...) myMethod3( );
}
}

Figure 5. Exception Propagation Path Example

gram language’s runtime environment. The information on
the affected data structures are added to the information in
the exception objects. Today exception objects mainly include stack trace information used for debugging purposes
when an exception leads to a system crash. Extending exception objects with references to the affected data structures will help in developing reasonable exception handling
mechanisms. Often, context information to understand the
exception on a higher abstraction level is missing anyway.
Besides the information that something went wrong signaled by an exception, information on affected data structures is essential.
After the data structures have been identified, client access has to be prevented or restricted automatically. Protective wrappers guarding the access have to be built
around the quarantine areas dynamically during runtime.
In a first prototype implementation the wrapping of data
structures can be achieved by providing or enhancing objects with constraints. These constraints implemented as
preconditions[10, 16] are true by default and can be adapted
during runtime. If the access to an object is to be prevented,
the precondition is simply changed to false. Between these
two extremes – full access and no access – arbitrary access restrictions embodied by formal boolean expressions
are possible. If an exception can be assigned to client’s
wrong input parameters for example, further calls with the
same parameters can be blocked by including the parameters into the precondition. The constraints defined for each
object must be maintained during execution unless they are
explicitly waived by the application. If a client application’s
access to a guarded object is declined a default exception
has to be raised. Every client commits to catch and handle
this default exception.
For every exception raised during runtime an analysis
can be performed to check if a corresponding exception
handler exists on the exception’s way up the stack trace.

Listing 2. Java Code Example

To ease the understanding of the static code analysis proposed in this paper a small Java code fragment is given in
listing 2.
The annotated exception propagation graph corresponding to the Java code fragment shown in listing 2 is illustrated
in figure 5.
3.2.2

Runtime Issues – Dynamic Fault Containment

As already illustrated there is a strong need for default exception handling mechanisms located on a software layer
below the application layer itself. These default mechanisms are not meant not replace customized application specific exception handlers but complement them. When an exception is raised during runtime the possibly affected data
structures have to be detected directly. This means the identification has to be performed before the exception objects
are created and especially before the exception objects are
propagated along the stack trace. It is not sufficient to only
identify object types but specific object instances. During
runtime when the exception is raised object references to
all affected data structures have to be collected by a system
mechanism. This feature has to be supported by the pro9

4

This runtime analysis is based on the exception propagation
graph (EPG) resulting from the static code analysis introduced in the section on static code analysis. Basically, the
exception identifier (of the exception currently raised) has
to be concatenated with the stack trace information representing the call path to the system point where the exception has been raised. Combining these two pieces of information results in an expression type similar to the exception path information introduced above (epi = exception ×
propagation path). As described earlier every node in the
exception propagation path is annotated with a regular expression representing the exception path. To analyze if an
exception currently raised will be caught on it’s way up the
stack trace, this exception’s actual exception path simply
has to be matched to the set of exception path regular expressions (epis) at the root node of the system or component
respectively. The exception path information set contains
all exceptions with the corresponding exception sources and
propagation paths propagated beyond the analyzed node in
the calling hierarchy. Consequently, if no match can be
found the exception is definitely caught by a corresponding handler on the propagation path and vice versa. The
matching can be easily achieved by a generated finite state
machine representing the regular expression. The exception
path to be matched can be regarded as a word in the sense
of formal languages that has to be accepted by the finite
state machine describing the language[11]. If there is no
match at the root node of the system it is assured that the
exception is handled by an application-level exception handler. In this case the exception is propagated up the stack
trace as usually done in today‘s exception handling mechanisms. After handling the exception in the application-level
exception handler the automatic fault containment has to be
revoked by removing the guarding wrappers. If a match can
be found it is assured that the exception will not be caught
on it’s way up the stack trace. In this case two steps have
to be taken – graceful degradation by restricting access to
affected data structures and transforming the uncaught incompatible exception into a compatible default exception.
The former step has already been initialized directly after
the exception was raised. Transforming the exception into
a default exception and adding references to affected data
structures is straight forward. Again a client has to commit
to catch the default exception.

Conclusion

Exception handling is often not considered high priority
when developing software systems. Systematic exception
handling strategies and tool support for reasoning about exception flow and exception compatibility between components are rare. Accidents such as the Ariane 5 crash illustrate the possible impact of inappropriate exception handling on the overall system dependability. In programming languages such as Java compilers help in reasoning
about exception flow. Nevertheless many problems such as
unchecked exceptions or long exception propagation paths
have to be detected and resolved by the developers manually during the development process and even still persist
undetected in deployed software systems.
In this paper a novel approach to systematic exception
handling based on a sound exception model is presented.
Reasoning about exception propagation within applications
using a graph-based static code analysis approach is emphasized. The overall objective of the graph-based analysis
approach is the identification of exception related problems
such as uncaught exceptions and long exception propagation paths. Based on a program’s abstract syntax tree the exception call graph (ECG) is derived – a graph representation
of the calling hierarchy, raised exceptions, the exception hierarchy, exception handlers and their interrelationship. The
exception call graph is extended with annotations representing exception propagation paths resulting in the exception
propagation graph (EPG). The exception propagation graph
directly reveals problems such as uncaught exceptions. Furthermore, the EPG supports dynamic fault containment during runtime detecting, collecting and isolating ”infected”
data structures. The concepts proposed in this work are applicable to any object-oriented programming language that
defines exceptions as objects. The following listing briefly
summarizes the contribution of this work:
• a novel graph-based exception analysis approach based
on static code analysis
• a novel concept improving current exception handling
mechanisms by extending programming language’s
exception handling constructs
• a novel generic fault containment approach proposed
as a system-level default exception handling mechanism based on the concept of graceful degradation

During the life cycle of a system fault containment data
accumulates. This data has to be cleaned up by a kind of
garbage collection. As already explained wrappers related
to exceptions already handled can be removed directly. Furthermore a mechanism to store fault containment data is required to persist this information. Housekeeping and persistence are in the scope of further investigation.

Future investigations will focus on:
• the development of a graph-based static code analysis
tool,
• the implementation of the generic fault containment
mechanism and
10

• the evaluation of the concepts introduced in this paper
by applying them to sample applications tested under
various injected fault conditions.

[20] B. G. Ryder, D. Smith, U. Kremer, M. Gordon, and N. Shah.
A static study of java exceptions using jesp. In CC ’00: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Compiler
Construction, pages 67–81, London, UK, 2000. SpringerVerlag.
[21] C. F. Schaefer and G. N. Bundy. Static analysis of exception
handling in ada. Softw. Pract. Exper., 23(10):1157–1174,
1993.
[22] S. Sinha and M. J. Harrold. Analysis and testing of programs with exception handling constructs. IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng., 26(9):849–871, 2000.
[23] B. Stroustrup. The C++ Programming Language, Third
Edition. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.,
Boston, MA, USA, 1997.

References
[1] M. Abadi and L. Cardelli. A Theory of Objects. Monographs
in Computer Science. Springer, 1996.
[2] A. Avizienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. E. Landwehr.
Basic concepts and taxonomy of dependable and secure
comput. IEEE Trans. Dependable Sec. Computing, 1(1):11–
33, 2004.
[3] P. A. Buhr and W. Y. R. Mok. Advanced exception handling mechanisms. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 26(9):820–836,
2000.
[4] B.-M. Chang, J.-W. Jo, and S. H. Her. Visualization of exception propagation for java using static analysis. page 173,
2002.
[5] B.-M. Chang, J.-W. Jo, K. Yi, and K.-M. Choe. Interprocedural exception analysis for java. In SAC ’01: Proceedings
of the 2001 ACM symposium on Applied computing, pages
620–625, New York, NY, USA, 2001. ACM.
[6] J. B. Goodenough. Exception handling: issues and a proposed notation. Commun. ACM, 18(12):683–696, 1975.
[7] J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, and G. Bracha. Java(TM)
Language Specification, The (3rd Edition) (Java Series).
Addison-Wesley Professional, July 2005.
[8] N. Heintze and J. Jaffar. Set constraints and set-based analysis. pages 281–298, 1994.
[9] A. Hejlsberg, S. Wiltamuth, and P. Golde. C# Language
Specification. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.,
Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 2003.
[10] C. A. R. Hoare. An axiomatic basis for computer programming. Commun. ACM, 12(10):576–580, 1969.
[11] J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J. D. Ullman. Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation (3rd
Edition). Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.,
Boston, MA, USA, 2006.
[12] J.-M. Jézéquel and B. Meyer. Design by contract: The
lessons of ariane. Computer, 30(1):129–130, 1997.
[13] J.-W. Jo, B.-M. Chang, K. Yi, and K.-M. Choe. An uncaught exception analysis for java. J. Syst. Softw., 72(1):59–
69, 2004.
[14] N. G. Leveson and C. S. Turner. An investigation of the
therac-25 accidents. Computer, 26(7):18–41, 1993.
[15] J. Lions. Ariane 501: Report by the inquiry board. 1996.
[16] B. Meyer. Applying ”design by contract”. Computer,
25(10):40–51, 1992.
[17] R. Miller and A. Tripathi. Issues with exception handling
in object-oriented systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1241:85–103, 1997.
[18] M. P. Robillard and G. C. Murphy. Analyzing exception flow
in java programs. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes, 24(6):322–
337, 1999.
[19] M. P. Robillard and G. C. Murphy. Static analysis to support
the evolution of exception structure in object-oriented systems. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 12(2):191–221,
2003.

11

