Using Architectural Properties to Model and Measure
System-Wide Graceful Degradation
Charles P. Shelton

Philip Koopman

ECE Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

ECE Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

cshelton@cmu.edu

koopman@cmu.edu

System-wide graceful degradation may be a viable approach to
improving dependability in computer systems. In order to evaluate
and improve system-wide graceful degradation we present initial
work on a component-based model that will explicitly define
graceful degradation as a system property, and measure how well a
system gracefully degrades in the presence of multiple
combinations of component failures. The system’s software
architecture plays a major role in this model, because the interface
and component specifications embody the architecture’s
abstraction principle. We use the architecture to group components
into subsystems that enable reasoning about overall system utility.
We apply this model to an example distributed embedded control
system and report on initial results.

we present a component-based system model that provides a means
for evaluating and predicting how well a system should gracefully
degrade, as well as how graceful degradation influences dependability properties. We base the model on using the system’s interface definitions and component connections to group the system’s
components into subsystems. We hypothesize that the software architecture, responsible for the overall organization of and connections among components, can facilitate the system’s ability to
implicitly provide the property of graceful degradation, without
specifying a response to each possible failure mode at design time.
We define a failure mode to be a set of system components failing
concurrently. By using the model to measure how gracefully a system degrades, we predict that we can identify what architectural
properties facilitate and impede system-wide graceful degradation.

ABSTRACT

1. INTRODUCTION
Dependability is a term that covers many system properties such as
reliability, availability, safety, maintainability, and security [4].
System dependability is especially important for embedded computer control systems, which pervade everyday life and can have severe consequences for failure. These systems increasingly
implement a significant portion of their functionality in software,
making software dependability a major issue.
Graceful degradation may be a viable approach to achieving better
software dependability. If a software system can gracefully degrade
automatically when faults are detected, then individual software
component failures will not cause complete system failure. Rather,
component failures will remove the functionality derived from that
component, while still preserving the operation of the rest of the
system. Specifying and achieving system-wide graceful degradation is a difficult research problem. Current approaches require
specifying every system failure mode ahead of time, and designing
a specific response for each such mode (e.g., [2]). This is impractical for a complex software system, especially a fine grained distributed embedded system with hundreds or thousands of software and
hardware components.
In order to evaluate and improve system-wide graceful degradation,

Related to our concept of graceful degradation is the term survivability. Survivability is another property of dependability that has
been proposed to explicitly define how systems will degrade functionality in the presence of failures [3]. Our work differs from survivability specifications in that we are interested in building
implicit graceful degradation into systems without specifying failure scenarios a priori, and having the system “do the right thing” in
the presence of component failures. Also, we are focusing on distributed embedded systems rather than on large-scale critical infrastructure information systems.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our initial system model and key assumptions. Section 3 describes our representative distributed embedded system and its
architecture, and applies our model to this architecture. Section 4
includes discussion about the model’s predictions, and how they
compare to initial fault injection tests we ran with a simulated version of the control system. Section 5 wraps up with conclusions and
future work.

2. SYSTEM MODEL
As a first step, we are concentrating on software architecture at a
high level of abstraction. Our system model initially focuses on the
“functionality” components of the system: software, sensors, and
actuators. We make the initial assumptions that individual software
components each have their own processing elements, that there is
enough network bandwidth to transmit all needed sensor values,
and that there are enough system resources to satisfy real-time re quirements. These system aspects will all influence system-wide
graceful degradation, but we are planning to include them in the
model at later stages.
We consider a system as a set of software, sensor, and actuator components. We use the interfaces among components to define a set of
system variables through which all components communicate.
These variables can represent any communication structure in the

software implementation. Actuators receive input variables and
output to the environment, while sensors receive input from the environment and output system variables. We assume that components can either be in one of two states: working or failed. Working
means that the component has enough resources to output its specified system variables. Failed means the component cannot produce
its specified outputs.
The fault model for our system uses the traditional fail-fast, fail silent assumption. All faults are manifested as the loss of system variable communication among components. Components either
provide their output variables or do not. Thus, failures can be de tected when components do not provide their outputs when specified. This does not account for more complex types of failures such
as providing invalid but syntactically correct information, and assumes component failures can be quickly detected. Fault detection
and propagation issues are challenging research areas in and of
themselves, and are outside the scope of this work. Additionally,
since software component failure rates are difficult to identify, we
make an initial assumption that all components have approximately
equal failure rates.
A key concept in our model is the notion of utility. Utility is a measure of how much benefit can be gained from the entire system, a
certain subsystem, or an individual component. For the entire system, the overall utility is determined by a nonlinear function of its
individual subsystem utilities. Each subsystem’s utility is determined by a nonlinear function of its individual component utilities.
For individual components, we define a component’s utility to be 1
when working and 0 when failed. We assume that if all components
are working the system will be at its maximum utility, and if all
components are failed, the system will have an overall utility of
zero. Thus, a system gracefully degrades if individual component
and subsystem failures reduce system utility gradually.
In our model, we initially concentrate on measuring whether the
system has zero or positive overall utility by identifying how resistant critical subsystems are to component failures. Determining the
functions that quantitatively measure how working components improve subsystem and system utility values is a challenging problem.
However, without knowing these functions we can initially make a
distinction between a system that is working and has positive but
not necessarily maximum utility, and a failed system that has zero
utility. In order to make this distinction we must have a clear definition of what “working” means for the entire system. In other words,
we must specify what features of the system are necessary for the
system to complete its primary functions. In most cases, this is not
all the features available in the system. For example, the primary
function of a car is to provide transportation. Critical features necessary for the car to continue working include engine and transmission control, brakes, and steering. The power windows, emissions
control, air conditioning, and radio provide auxiliary functionality
not necessary for the car to complete its primary task, and can be
lost without causing a catastrophic failure.
The system can have many different component configurations
based on which components are working or failed. If n is the number of components in the system, then there are 2n different configurations that can be considered.
The system’s component
configuration determines the utility of all its subsystems, and thus
the utility of the entire system. An ideal gracefully degrading system is one where a large fraction of these 2n configurations result in
a system with overall positive utility; i.e., the system can tolerate
multiple combinations of component failures and still provide useful functionality.

Our first metric for graceful degradation is the system’s resistance
to complete failure (zero system utility). We determine this value
by looking at how many configurations result in a system with positive utility. The ratio of log2 [number of valid component configurations] / n gives a measure of how many configurations will provide
utility relative to the total number of system configurations. This
value is 0 (only one valid configuration) for a brittle system, and 1
for a perfect system where any component configuration can provide some utility (ignoring the trivial configuration of zero components that results in no system at all).
Clearly, if we had to consider the utility of every possible component configuration individually, then specifying graceful degradation becomes exponentially difficult as the number of components
increases. However, we can use the system’s software architecture,
which defines system software components, input and output interfaces, and connections among components, to group components
into subsystems according to the system variables they provide, and
thus reduce complexity.
We define these subsystems in our component model as feature subsets. A feature subset is a set of components (software components,
sensors, actuators, and possibly other feature subsets) that work together to provide a set of output variables. Feature subsets may or
may not be disjoint and can share components across different subsets. Feature subsets have utility values based on which of their
components are working, and contribute to overall system utility. A
feature subset is critical if its functionality is required by the system;
i.e., the total system utility is zero whenever any critical feature subset has zero utility. Thus, the system will have positive utility if and
only if all of its critical feature subsets have positive utility. If we
view the system as a set of feature subsets rather than individual
components, then we should only need to consider valid component
configurations of critical feature subsets rather than configurations
of all system components to determine how well the system gracefully degrades.
In addition to grouping components into feature subsets, we define a
set of dependency relationships between feature subsets and their
components. A feature subset may have strong dependence on
some of its components, weak dependence on others, and some of
its components may be completely optional. A feature subset
strongly depends on one of its components if the loss of that component results in the feature subset’s having zero utility. A feature subset weakly depends on one of its components if the loss of that
component reduces the feature subset’s utility to zero in some, but
not all, configurations in which that component was working. For
example, if there are two components that output a required system
variable, loss of both will result in the feature subset having zero
utility, but loss of only one or the other will not. If a component is
optional to a feature subset, then it may provide enhancements to
the feature subset’s utility, but is not critical to the operation of the
feature subset. Every valid component configuration of the feature
subset where that component is working still provides positive (but
possibly lower) utility when that component is broken. These de pendency relationships can also exist among individual components as well, based on their input and output interfaces. A
component that requires a certain system variable as an input will
depend on the components that provide it as an output.
We can use this model to develop a space of systems with varying
degrees of graceful degradation. At one end of the spectrum, we
have extremely “brittle” systems that are not capable of any graceful degradation at all. In these systems, any one component failure
will result in a complete system failure. In our model, this would be
a system where every component is within a critical feature subset,

Table 1. Sensors, Actuators, and Software Components in the Elevator Architecture
Sensor Type

#

Output Variable

Actuator Type

#

DriveSpeed

1

DriveSpeed

Drive Motor

1

DriveMotor

Drive Control

1

DriveMotor

CarPosition

1

CarPosition

Door Motor

1

DoorMotor

Door Control

1

DoorMotor

AtFloor

f

AtFloor[f]

Emergency Brake

1

EmergencyBrake

Safety

1

EmergencyBrake

HoistwayLimit

2

HoistwayLimit[d]

Car Lanterns

2

CarLantern[d]

Dispatcher

1

DesiredFloor

DoorClosed

1

DoorClosed

Car Position Indicator

1

CarPositionIndicator VirtualAtFloor

f

AtFloor

DoorOpened

1

DoorOpened

Car Button Lights

f

CarLight[f]

Lantern Control

2

CarLantern[d]

DoorReversal

1

DoorReversal

Hall Button Lights

2f-2

HallLight[f,d]

Car Position Indicator Control

1

CarPositionIndicator

Car Buttons

f

CarCall[f]

Car Button Control

f

CarLight[f]

Hall Buttons

2f-2

HallCall[f,d]

Hall Button Control

2f-2

HallLight[f,d]

and each feature subset strongly depends on all of its components.
Therefore, every component must be functioning to have positive
system utility.
Similarly, any modular redundant system can be represented as a
collection of several critical feature subsets, where each feature subset contains multiple copies of a component plus a voter. The valid
configurations that provide positive utility for each feature subset
are those that contain the voter plus one or more component copies.
This redundant system can tolerate multiple failures across many
feature subsets, but cannot tolerate the failure of any one voter or all
the component copies in any one feature subset.
At the other end of the spectrum, an ideal gracefully degrading system is one where any combination of component failures will still
leave a system with positive utility. In our model, this system would
be one where none of its feature subsets would be labeled as critical,
and every component would be completely optional to each feature
subset in which it was a member. The system would continue to
have positive utility until every component failed.

3. EXAMPLE SYSTEM: A DISTRIBUTED
ELEVATOR CONTROL SYSTEM
To illustrate how we can apply our system model to a control system, we will use a model of a relatively complex distributed elevator control system. The complete details of the model have been
published in [6], but we will describe a portion of the system and the
software architecture here for clarity.
The general requirement for an elevator is that it must safely transport people among floors in a building. The control system has a set
of sensors (door opened/closed, elevator speed, button sensors, etc.)
for determining the current environment and passenger requests, a
set of actuators (door motor, drive motor, emergency brake, lights,
etc.) for performing tasks and informing passengers about system
state, and a set of software objects (door controller, drive controller,
dispatcher, etc.) that implement the control logic to perform the elevator’s functions.
Table 1 summarizes the list of sensors, actuators, and software components in the elevator control system. In the table, f represents the
number of floors in the elevator’s building, and d represents a
choice of two directions, up or down. For example, there are f floor
sensors and f car button sensors (one for each floor), two hoistway
limit sensors (the “up” sensor is at the top of the hoistway, and the
“down” sensor is at the bottom), and 2f - 2 hall button sensors (two

Input Variable

Software Component

#

Output Variable

per floor in each direction, except for the top and bottom floors,
which only have one button). In the table each sensor has a specified output variable, and each actuator has a specified input variable. The software components have several inputs and a few
outputs. There are a total of 14 + 11f components in the system.
The system’s software architecture defines each component’s input
and output interface, as well as connections among components,
which can be used to construct the system’s feature subsets. Figure
1 shows the critical feature subsets of the system, and the dependencies between the feature subsets and components. Each arrow in the
figure represents a system variable being communicated between
components. In an elevator control system, the only critical functions of the elevator are that it must be able to service all floors, open
and close the doors, and ensure the safety of the passengers. All
other functionality, such as responding to passenger requests, providing passenger feedback, and minimizing wait time and travel
time, are enhancements over the basic elevator requirements.
Therefore, the critical feature subsets for this system are only the
feature subsets that are required to operate the drive motor, door
motor, and emergency brake actuators.
The software components are designed to have a default behavior
based on their required inputs, and to treat optional inputs as “ad vice” to improve functionality when those inputs are available. For
example, the Door Control and Drive Control components can listen to each other’s command output variables in addition to the
Drive Speed and Door Closed sensors to synchronize their behavior
(open the doors more quickly after the car stops), but only the sensor
values are necessary for correct behavior. Likewise, the Drive Control component has a default behavior that stops the elevator at every floor, but if the DesiredFloor variable is available from the
Dispatcher component, then it can use that value to skip floors that
do not have any pending requests. Also, the Door Control component normally opens the door for a specified dwell time, but can respond to button presses to reopen the doors if a passenger arrives.
We also enumerated the other non-critical feature subsets in the elevator system such as the various passenger feedback lights in the elevator, but we omit them here for the sake of brevity.

4. ANALYSIS
In order to derive the graceful degradation metric for our elevator
control system, we need only consider the critical feature subsets
and the components upon which they depend. Therefore, all configurations containing enough components to provide working Drive

Emergency Brake

Door Control
Feature

Drive Control
Feature

Safety
Feature

At Floor
Feature

Desired Floor
Feature

Door Control
Component

Drive Control
Component

Safety
Component

Drive Door Hoistway
Speed Closed Limits

Door Motor

Drive Motor

Drive Control
Feature

At Floor
Feature
Drive Door
Speed Closed

Feature Subset
Software Component
Sensor
Actuator
Strong Dependence (Necessary for all configurations)
Weak Dependence (Necessary for some configurations)
Optional (Provides non-critical utility enhancement)

Door Control
Feature

Desired Floor
Feature

Drive
Speed
Door Door
Closed Opened

Car
Position

At Floor
Feature
Door
Reversal

At Floor
Feature

Hall Buttons
Feature

Car Buttons
Feature
Hall Button
Sensors
Car Button
Sensors

Virtual At Floor
Components
At Floor
Sensors
Drive
Car
Position Speed

Diagram uses multiple identical components in different
places for clarity. Components/Feature subsets with the same
name actually represent only one component or feature subset
in the system.
Optional feature subsets not shown:
Car Button Lights, Hall Button Lights, Car Position Indicator,
Car Lanterns

Figure 1. Critical Feature Subsets in the Elevator Control System
Control, Door Control, Safety, and AtFloor feature subsets are
valid, and can contain any arbitrary combination of other optional
system components. There are 1 + 9f optional system components
(which can be arranged in 21 + 9f different arbitrary combinations),
leaving 13 + 2f critical components (components within critical feature subsets) that have configurations that require examining (and
213 + 2f component combinations left to consider individually).
By examining the critical feature subsets, we can see that they are
strongly dependent on the Drive Speed, Door Closed, Door Opened,
Door Reversal, and Hoistway Limits sensors, the Drive Control,
Door Control, and Safety software components, and the Drive Motor, Door Motor, and Emergency Brake actuators. Any valid con figuration must have all of these twelve components present.
Therefore, we can restrict the number of configurations we calculate by not considering any configurations in which these components are broken.
This leaves 1 + 2f components (the Car Position sensor, the AtFloor
sensors, and the VirtualAtFloor software components) in the
AtFloor feature subset to be considered. By examining the critical
feature subsets, we have systematically reduced the graceful degradation calculation from considering 214 + 11f combinations to 21 + 2f
combinations. Now we can determine the number of valid configurations for the AtFloor feature by noting that all floors must be serviced by the elevator. Therefore, on each floor there must be a
working AtFloor sensor or a working VirtualAtFloor component
with a working Car Position sensor. If the Car Position sensor
breaks, then all AtFloor sensors must work. Since all the AtFloor
sensors must work in this situation, they are fixed and have one configuration. However, the VirtualAtFloor components can either
work or not work since their failure will not affect the availability of
the AtFloor system variables, making 2f valid combinations for the
various VirtualAtFloor components. If the Car Position sensor
works, then one or both AtFloor sensor and VirtualAtFloor component must work for each floor, so the only invalid combinations are
when both have failed for at least one floor. This means there are 3
valid combinations per floor, making 3f valid combinations out of
the possible 22f. Thus there are 2f + 3 f valid combinations of components in the AtFloor feature subset.

Multiplying this with the number of combinations of optional components results in a total of (2f + 3f)(21 + 9f) valid component configurations. Taking the base 2 log of this and dividing it by the total
number of system components (14 + 11f) gives us our graceful degradation metric. If we calculate this value for an elevator that serves
seven floors, we get 0.83.
For comparison, we also consider an elevator system that does not
contain any VirtualAtFloor software components.
The
VirtualAtFloor components improved the system’s ability to gracefully degrade because they provided a way to compensate for
AtFloor sensor failures by using information provided by other system sensors to synthesize AtFloor sensor values. Therefore, if we
remove the VirtualAtFloor components, the resultant system should
also receive a lower graceful degradation value.
In our model, the removal of the VirtualAtFloor components reduces the AtFloor feature subset to being strongly dependent on all
of the AtFloor sensors. Therefore there is only one valid configuration for the AtFloor feature subset in which every AtFloor sensor
must work. Since this is a critical feature subset, all valid system
configurations must contain a working AtFloor feature subset. Additionally, the Car Position sensor becomes an optional system component because the AtFloor feature subset no longer depends on it.
This results in there being only 22 + 9f valid system configurations
since most of the components in the critical feature subsets must
work and only the optional components can have multiple valid
configurations. The total number of system components is also reduced by the removal of the f VirtualAtFloor components, leaving
14 + 10f total system components. For a seven-floor elevator, this
results in a graceful degradation score of 0.77.
The graceful degradation metric provides a concrete comparison
among similar systems. We can quantitatively assess how adding or
subtracting components to the system affects its ability to gracefully
degrade. However, this metric may be misleading when comparing
two systems that are substantially different in terms of functionality
and number and type of system components.
We have developed a discrete event simulator that implements our
elevator architecture, and have run some initial fault injection ex-

periments to evaluate whether the implemented system actually
gracefully degrades. So far, every test we have run with one of the
possible valid configurations was able to successfully deliver all
passengers to their destination floors, including a test that failed all
components but the critical ones and the AtFloor sensors.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have demonstrated a component-based system model that can
provide insight into how well a system will perform graceful degradation in the presence of multiple component failures. We developed an initial metric for graceful degradation that indicates how
many combinations of component failures can be tolerated by ex amining critical subsystem configurations rather than considering
every possible system component configuration. In some initial experiments on a simulated implementation of the example control
system studied, we found that the architecture described was resistant to certain combinations of component failures, as predicted by
the model.
We did not incorporate failure recovery scenarios for every possible
combination of component failures, but rather built the software
components to the architectural specification. The individual components were designed to ignore optional input variables when they
were not available and follow a default behavior. This is a fundamentally different approach to system-wide graceful degradation
than specifying all possible failure combinations to be handled
ahead of time.
Properties of the software architecture such as the component interfaces and the identification and partitioning of critical system functionality from the rest of the system seem to be key to achieving
system-wide graceful degradation. The model we developed illustrates how well a system can gracefully degrade by using the software architecture’s component connections to decompose the
system. We are also exploring how to use an architectural description language such as Acme [1] to provide rigorous component interface specifications and facilitate development of our system
model.
For this particular system, it is relatively easy to calculate the possible valid configurations by examining the software architecture
without the model. However, the model provides a systematic
framework for partitioning the system based on its software architecture, and we hypothesize that it will be useful in evaluating any
architectural specification that has a well-defined component interface. This framework allows us to measure the graceful degradation
properties of individual feature subsets with respect to their components as well. The architecture and model also identify a set of critical system components within the critical feature subsets that must
continue to operate to provide any system functionality. This can be
used to determine on which system components to spend effort ensuring component reliability through redundancy and other fault
tolerance measures.

Our next step is to extend this model to incorporate the allocation of
the software components to hardware units. In a distributed system,
components that communicate via the network are strongly dependent on the network for their required input variables, making the
network a single point of failure. Also, software components are
strongly dependent on the hardware node on which they are hosted.
These constraints will surely influence a system’s ability to gracefully degrade (hardware failures might remove multiple components simultaneously), but may be ameliorated by system-wide
reconfiguration as proposed in [5]. Additionally, we want to further
develop the concept of system utility to not only distinguish between when the system is “broken” or “not broken,” but also different levels of functionality available in different system
configurations. We have identified which configurations result in
systems with positive utility, but we also need to quantitatively determine which of those configurations have higher utility than others. This will be based on determining which features are more
useful than others based on measures such as performance and functionality.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the General Motors Satellite Research
Lab at Carnegie Mellon University, and Lucent Technologies.
Thanks to Beth Latronico, Bill Nace, Orna Raz, and Yang Wang for
their help in developing the ideas presented.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Garlan, D., Monroe, R.T., Wile, D., “Acme: Architectural
Description of Component-Based Systems,” Foundations of
Component-Based Systems, Leavens, G.T., Sitaraman, M.
(eds), Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 47-68.
[2] Herlihy, M. P., Wing, J. M., “Specifying Graceful
Degradation,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, vol.2, no.1, pp. 93-104, 1991.
[3] Knight, J.C., Sullivan, K.J., "On the Definition of
Survivability," University of Virginia, Department of
Computer Science, Technical Report CS-TR-33-00, 2000.
[4] Laprie, J.-C., "Dependability of Computer Systems:
Concepts, Limits, Improvements", Proceedings of the Sixth
International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering, Toulouse, France, Oct. 1995, pp. 2-11.
[5] Nace, W., Koopman, P., “A Product Family Approach to
Graceful Degradation,” Distributed and Parallel Embedded
Systems (DIPES), October 2000.
[6] Shelton, C., Koopman, P., “Developing a Software
Architecture for Graceful Degradation in an Elevator Control
System,” Workshop on Reliability in Embedded Systems (in
conjunction with Symposium on Reliable Distributed
Systems/SRDS-2001), October 2001, New Orleans, LA.

